---
date: 2009-12-05 12:06:33
title: On Privacy and Intimacy
---

> Although I am a well-known person and have made my career as a professional athlete, I have been dismayed to realize the full extent of what tabloid scrutiny really means. For the last week, my family and I have been hounded to expose intimate details of our personal lives. . . .

> But no matter how intense curiosity about public figures can be, there is an important and deep principle at stake which is the right to some simple, human measure of privacy. I realize there are some who don't share my view on that. But for me, the virtue of privacy is one that must be protected in matters that are intimate and within one's own family. Personal sins should not require press releases and problems within a family shouldn't have to mean public confessions.

> Whatever regrets I have about letting my family down have been shared with and felt by us alone. I have given this a lot of reflection and thought and I believe that there is a point at which I must stick to that principle even though it's difficult. 
#### —Tiger Woods, [in a statement on his website](http://www.cnn.com/2009/US/12/02/tiger.woods.statement/index.html)

Tiger, though a public figure, insists here that there is a limit to the public's right-to-know, and that he should not be expected to render a public accounting of his misdeeds.

This expectation that his fans' curiosity should only extend to his golfing belies the very mechanism of celebrity status, which is based precisely on the notion of persona, and persona is not limited by time or space. If Tiger's popularity were strictly related to his golf accomplishments, his appeal would be much more limited, and would wax and wane in response to Tiger's good and bad days on the links. On the contrary, Tiger, like all celebrities, needs and cultivates a fame that is separate of whatever initially brought them into the public sphere, i.e., a fame based precisely on being in the public eye, precisely in order to make sure that he is a valuable asset for companies who will award him endorsement contracts. If you want people to be curious about you, then, it is laughable to think that when you do something scandalous (and what is more scandalous in retro-Puritan America than extra-marital sex?) to think that at that moment, you fans are going to turn a bored ear away and let you wallow in your sins in private. Celebrity doesn't come with an on/off switch.

What heightens the irony of Wood's request for privacy is the nature of his "transgression," which precisely a betrayal of what should be most private, most guarded--the sexual intimacy of a married couple. Of course, on this, front, too, America has blurred the lines so much that one begins to forget where they ought to be: not only is the exposing of marital affairs among the famous a media sport, we also have destroyed any sense of discretion when it comes to the discussing of our bodies: on a nightly basis, the words "erection" and "semen," in addition to a whole host of other terms related to other functions "down there" are bantered around on commercials as if talking about the most personal workings of our bodies were as banal as pushing laundry soap and mascara. This "normalization' is, of course, the goal: you can hardly sell something to millions if you cannot talk about it openly, and naturally the best place to talk about something to sell it is TV.

While adultery is as old as the hills, and while arguably Tiger Woods possesses some entirely individual reasons for serially cheating on his (supermodel!) wife, we might also consider how the erosion of privacy, and the cultivation of a culture where being watched equals being important, affects our own internal sense of what is truly intimate, and how those intimate things should be treated.
