---
layout: post
date: 2011-02-01 15:55:25
title: "Lost (loves) and found"
---

I don't know many people who have died, but hardly a week goes by when I don't meet someone new through his or her obituary. Recently, [NPR introduced me to Reynolds Price](http://www.npr.org/2011/01/20/133094306/novelist-professor-reynolds-price-dies), a well known Duke professor and novelist. 

<!--more-->
### Late learners
While learning about someone interesting after you can no longer meet him or her might provoke a certain sadness among those predisposed to nostalgia, personally I lean more toward a practical analysis, and am grateful to the genre of the obituary, given that I figure I would have likely never met the person in question anyway. Obituaries, like memory itself, distill us into our purest essence, our most portable, teachable moments. And so I smiled to hear Price's maxim on the radio that morning: "You'll only regret your economies," advice he had received while in Oxford from his thesis examiner and English professor, Nevill Coghill, who had received it from his mother on her deathbed. 

My mother reads the obituaries without fail in the [New York Times](http://www.nytimes.com) -- our household paper of choice, which my retired father must read before my mother absconds with it on her commute. This, along with a patience for the sports pages which is clearly not genetically transmissible, clearly accounts for her immense knowledge of recent history and related arcana (details of our last match of Trivial Pursuit have been sealed to protect egos). 

Indeed, it was only thanks to this habit of hers that I found out about the passing of the mother of my first boyfriend last July -- well, she passed in mid-July, but it was two weeks later when my mother called me. I woke up one morning to a voicemail relating the news. I couldn't help but notice the fact that, in some sense, my mourning was belated, out of sync with the death that provoked it. 

Of course, all such emotions (even the banal discovery in the evening that in fact we have left our keys somewhere) are after the fact, as how can we have a feeling about something we do not know has happened? And indeed, it is only in very recent times that we would even expect to be informed in a timely manner of even these most important matters -- in the days where the fastest a letter could travel was a sailboat or horseback, one could find oneself in the position of making a much larger mental adjustment upon receipt of a letter than the two weeks I found myself making, as I thought back to what I had been doing on the day that was now defined as her last. 

I posted the link to the obituary in the Times on Facebook, and I asked my mother to save the paper copy. A Facebook friend (ugh, Mark, we have you to thank for this sad [retronym](http://www.nytimes.com/1995/03/19/magazine/on-language-return-of-the-retronyms.html)) thanked me for introducing me to her work (she was a scholar) a response that threw me for a moment... it hadn't crossed my mind at the time, but the woman I knew privately -- indeed, she had at one point been like a second mother to me -- was (naturally) not the woman described in the article, which (also naturally) described her public persona. But although I am telling you what she meant to me here and now, it would never have crossed my mind to post that sentiment on Facebook. 

### Sitting shiva in the electronic age 
I have never sat shiva but I am fascinated by it. Traditionally, [this Jewish custom of mourning the seven first-degree relatives](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shiva_(Judaism)) entails stopping the business of regular life for seven days, covering the mirrors in your house, sitting on the floor or on low stools, and receiving the visits of family, friends and community. In its fullest form, this practice is, like most religious rituals of old religions, quite elaborate and, were I to have occasion to adopt it (my parents -- the only first-degree relatives I posses -- however, have been instructed they are not allowed to die for many years to come), I would do so as a cook preparing a complex recipe for the first time. Nevertheless, I suspect the adoption of these old rituals would come easier than does navigating the (as yet unformalized, at least to my knowledge) etiquette for what might be called the modern, secular version of shiva: Facebook. 

Recently, two friends have lost people close to them, a fact that has been revealed to me via Facebook. In the first case, I managed to insert my foot quite neatly in my mouth by, a month later, writing an email to this friend in which I made no mention of this death. Although of course I had seen the posts relating the friend's friend passing, I had no idea how close she (the friend's friend) had been to her (my friend). I regretted my faux-pas, but I also found myself angry at Facebook for putting me in a situation one would never have been put in -- or much less easily so, anyway -- in times before the dominance of social media, i.e., of informed uninformedness. 

Informed uninformedness is the condition of knowing a fact, but having little or no ability to judge its importance, and thus no cue to respond in a socially appropriate manner. Had my friend communicated directly to me about her friend's death, she would have automatically contextualized it, since she would have known that otherwise I would not have understood that this person was a very close friend of hers. Announcing it on Facebook, while not inappropriate and of course convenient, could not give everyone the necessary (individual) context that is required for the most effective social assimilation of this information. I do not blame my friend for my putting my foot in my mouth, but I worry that there is very little way to prevent this kind of thing from occurring over and over. 

My other example is of a different sort, but poses, at least in my opinion, no less of an etiquette dilemma. On a Saturday morning, I checked into Facebook only to discover that a friend of mine had just lost her father. Clearly, there is no ambiguity about the importance of such an event; the death of a parent is often a defining milestone in one's life, no matter at what age it comes. Moreover, I knew very well the specifics of my friend's father's health issues and the difficulties of their relationship. Here the issue was not a lack of information, but a confusion on how to reply, on what was expected of a friend in this circumstance. Should I post a reply? If so, what could one say that would somehow be appropriate for everyone to see and yet not merely generic? Again, I found myself frustrated. 

Facebook has created a public forum for all sorts of events and emotions, from the banal to the breathtaking, but I have the nagging suspicion that it does better with the banal. Or perhaps for me, personally, the banal banter raises fewer questions and causes me less anxiety. I have nothing against anyone mourning on Facebook; grief appropriately has both a public and private aspect, a personal and communal part to it. Yet I still think I will stick to phone calls and snail mail greeting cards. In short, I will stick to the retronyms of mourning, if for no other reasons that I know them better. 

### Crimes, opportunities 
Late one night 23 years ago, a couple took their daughter Carlina to a Harlem hospital with a high fever. The woman to whom they relinquished their 19-year-old baby wasn't a nurse, however, even though she was apparently dressed like one. She was Ann Pettway, who kidnapped Carlina and raised her as Nejdra Nance in Bridgeport, CT. 

You have to wonder if there had been other nights in which Ms. Pettway had haunted those halls, costumed as a nurse, awaiting possible prey. Or could the nurse impersonation thing have had its own _raison d'être_, and the stealing of a baby arisen as a non-premeditated crime of opportunity? 

Stranger still, Carlina long suspected that her mother was not actually -- or even legitimately but non-biologically -- her mother. Ms. Pettway could never produce her birth certificate or her social security card. Eventually, she solved her own kidnapping case by finding a photo that looked like (and was) here on the website of the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Twenty-three years is a long time, certainly, but it does not seem to have taken very long at all for Carlina to connect with her actual mother, as if that space had been magically preserved in her heart since the day they were accidentally and negligently parted all those years ago. 

In this age of confession and networking, one might think that the only kind of secrets around would be open secrets. Somehow, though, people and facts manage to remain hidden, revealed only though due diligence and serendipitous coincidences, as was the case with Patricia Lloyd. Lloyd was recently revealed to be [Oprah Winfrey's half-sister](http://www.oprah.com/oprahshow/Oprahs-Family-Secret/), having been born to Oprah's mother in 1963 and given up for adoption, entirely unbeknownst to Oprah (who was nine and living with her father at the time). On the same day that Lloyd was told that her birth mother did not want to meet her at that time, she saw an interview on television with Vernita Lee, Oprah's mother, whose tale of two deceased children matched the details of what Lloyd knew of her own birth mother. And so it was that it occurred to Lloyd and her son that she could very well be related to one of the world's most recognized women. 

But Lloyd didn't go to the media. Eventually, she went to meet her niece, Alisha, the daughter of her (deceased) sister, who, coincidentally, was also named Patricia (but who went by Pat). The resemblance between Patricia and Pat is, apparently, uncanny. "It was a *Beloved* moment, if you know what I mean: the daughter who comes back from the dead," Oprah said, about meeting Lloyd for the first time in November 2010. 

Lloyd's story is all the more remarkable given that she has not tried to profit from the sensationalism that secrets about famous people can instantly provoke, if the media fires are properly stoked. Indeed, Lloyd never went to the press, and hoped that no one else would do so, for fear of causing trouble for her famous half-sister. 

Even us pseudo|anonymous folks, living in the meager spotlight of our computer screens, can appreciate Oprah's remark about Lloyd's integrity: "She never once thought to go to the press. She never once thought to sell this story. ... When I heard this about you, I said, 'Regardless if it's true or not true, I had to meet you because I wanted to meet somebody who had that kind of character.' So thank you." 

There are so many ways to define and constitute a family, so much for it to contain -- love and strife, togetherness and estrangement, care and abandonment, truths and fictions -- yet the word itself seems to be oddly immune to modification. When someone is family, that simply says it all.