---
date: 2011-02-01 16:10:22
title: words | words | words
layout: post
---

> Violence -- whether in word or deed -- is both an inevitable human impulse and a failure of the moral imagination. That's the business we're in, as artists.
#### —Steve Almond, [Surely Some Revelation Is at Hand](http://therumpus.net/2011/01/surely-some-revelation-is-at-hand/)

### Teach the Children ([NPR](http://www.npr.org/2011/01/10/132740565/closing-the-achievement-gap-with-baby-talk), 10 January 2011)

In a world now abuzz with the threat of media overwhelm, silence (or relative silence) still reigns in certain places. Researchers have discovered that poorer parents talk significantly less to their children than do "professional" parents, i.e., those with higher levels of education and income.

> Hart and Risley estimated that by the age of 4, children of professional parents had heard on average 48 million words addressed to them while children in poor welfare families had heard only 13 million.

It was no wonder that the underprivileged children they saw at their preschool could not catch up and often lagged behind once they went to school. They simply weren't getting the experience with language provided to their peers.

One is tempted to wonder whether it is fair to call language a privilege, whether this is not a form of presumption, perhaps the ultimate presumption of a certain strata of society that some label—with disdain— "elite." If the right to procreate is unalienable—and surely it has to be one of the most fundamental of those in the "life and liberty" category—then it must also be part of that right to raise those children in whatever (or almost whatever) manner one sees fit. Even from my seat on the left of the political smorgasbord, the idea of instructing low-income mothers on how to increase linguistic interaction by critiquing videotaped moments with their children does seem a bit nanny-state-ish. Sadly, these efforts don't do bleeding-heart liberals any favors. They are the equivalent of restoring the beach with buckets of sand, instead of addressing the real issue—ocean tides. Such interventions smack of condescension and, worse yet, merely throw a pop-psychology bone at the dog of poverty. The true root of perpetual poverty, in addition to underpaid and overworked parents, is the lack of a genuine commitment in this country to quality, equal-opportunity health care, child care, and education. (Oh, and the increasing consolidation of our national wealth in the hands of an ever-diminishing few.)

Today's liberals have lost the way if it has become acceptable to promote the idea that poverty is somehow cultural, and can be counteracted by what amounts, frankly, to teaching poor parents to mimic the cultural status markers of chatty, hovering, anxious (white) parents preoccupied with their offspring's achievement. The American Dream, and its melting pot, used to work its magic in precisely the opposite way. It used to take children of all backgrounds and cultures, and give them—through rigorous, free and equal-opportunity education—the bonds of common knowledge and shared worldliness, which is a culture all to itself. If this sounds naive now, it is because it is naive now, given that we as a nation can no longer agree on what our children should be learning, or what views about the world they should share. Moreover, even "Hollywood liberals" such as Robert De Niro now freely acknowledge (at the 2011 Golden Globe Awards) that an actor's best hope for his children that "the movies do well enough so you can keep them in private schools." This after *Glee* writer Ian Brennan offered a shout-out to public school teachers: "You  don't get paid like it, but you are doing the most important work in  America."

### Grammar Made Me Do It
> Secondly, my hope—is for you to be literate! If you're literate in English grammar, then you comprehend English grammar. The majority of people, who reside in District 8, are illiterate—hilarious. I don't control your English grammar structure, but you control your English grammar structure.
#### Jared Lee Loughner, from the YouTube video [Hello (Jared Loughner mirror)](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4muIWxxy3c4tp://)

There are many reasons to be disappointed in our elected officials, and while arguably most reasonable people would not think that their believing in the validity of the U.S. Constitution would make them "stupid and unintelligent"—as [Jared Lee Loughner apparently remarked about Gabrielle Giffords](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/09/us/politics/09shooter.html), after speaking to her at a public event in 2007—these same reasonable people would very likely agree that Loughner is more than entitled to his opinion.

The problem, however, is that he is also entitled to lethal weapons, weapons whose deadliness he fetishized in pornographic images of himself and his Glock. (Rhymes with....) Images that he intended to be found after his own assassination, [dropping the film off to be developed at a Walgreens](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/16/us/16loughner.html?pagewanted=7) the night before the attack at the Safeway.

While Loughner's views will seem laughably fringe or outright crazy to many, if not most, the patent acceptance and/or rabid attachment to the Second Amendment remains, even in the wake of the Tuscon "tragedy," the unquestionable status quo in this country. Even if we woke up tomorrow with a functional mental health system in this country, the only way to prevent Loughner or someone with his same intent from easily getting a Glock will be to prevent everyone from easily getting a Glock. I don't know why the majority of people in this country aren't ready to go without their "right" to a Glock in order to deprive Loughner of his... or maybe they are, but the majority's voice isn't being heard.

Anyway, I'm not holding my breath for Congresswoman Giffords to change her opinion on gun control. Guns don't kill people, crazy people kill people, and there's nothing you can do about that, like accidents on the highway. We will mourn the dead and shake our heads, but in the end we prefer the narrative of the marvelous medical heroics that have saved Gifford's life, the "miracle" of her survival, over a serious reconsideration of the banal realities (principally among them, easy access to guns) that led to the attack that left her injured and six other people dead, including a nine-year-old girl with a budding interest in government. Born on a terribly dark day for America's foreign policy, 9.11.2001, Christina-Taylor Green died the victim of America's greatest domestic scourge -- the combination of virulent (even paranoid) dissent and access to weapons of mass destruction.

I agree that he was mentally disturbed, but Jared Lee Loughner was not running in circles, he was not merely held hostage to his paranoia. He had a violent plan and he was lucid enough to interact normally with an officer of the law at a traffic stop the very morning of the attack. There was no probable cause to warrant a search of his car, whose trunk held the paraphernalia of his planned trouble. Loughner got a lot of constitutional benefits: free speech, unimpaired access to arms, and the protection against unwarranted search and seizure. One is hard pressed to understand why the Reconstruction amendments (the so-called 'ratifications') and the issue of a gold-backed currency bothered him so much. Even if you are content to call Loughner crazy, know that plenty of not mentally disturbed people are bothered by these and other issues that are equally inscrutable—the birther movement, to mention just one. Have you listened to the [birther in the Congressional visitor's gallery](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J3Scvqylprc) interrupting the reading of Article 2, section 1 (regarding citizenship requirements for the President) and calling for Jesus's help?

### Blood, Libel
Leave it to Sarah Palin to unveil the Jewish angle of the Tuscon attack. Although not much has been made of it, Giffords, Loughner's prime target, is Jewish. I have no idea whether Loughner knew this, but arguably Sarah Palin -- or whoever wrote her speech -- did know this, and the same certainly knew the meaning of the term "blood libel."

The term refers to historical lies about Jews, including their responsibility for the murder of Jesus, that have justified their hatred and persecution. The word *libel* reflects the falsehood of such accusations (from a historical perspective), while the term *blood* recalls the brutality of the crimes of which the Jews were falsely accused. [Sarah Palin](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jb0VW8vnMhQ) uses the term to defend herself against the accusation that she, through her rhetoric, is responsible for the bloodshed in Tuscon. Cleverly, she has placed herself in the position of the victim—she is the one persecuted falsely, she is the Jew who has been unfairly accused of murdering Christ.

The flammability of this remark in the mouth of a woman who makes so much of her Christian faith cannot be underestimated. Indeed, her entire speech is a catechism in a subtle recasting of the events in Tuscon in religious terms—from her opening line about the death of innocents, her reflection on the beautiful Catholic mass held in honor of the victims, and her insertion that "in times like these, we need God's guidance, and the peace He provides" in the face of the "evil" witnessed in Tuscon.

Politics, in Sarah Palin's view, has always been more nasty than nice—"if men and women were angels, there would be no need for government." In other words, it is an activity of a fallen world, and thus appropriately heated and (perhaps) inevitably violent, even if these days the violence is dismissed as "random acts of a criminal."

Palin instead is confident that Giffords knew, when she read aloud the First Amendment of "our sacred charter of liberty" on the first day of the 112th Congress, that she was engaged in an act that was more than "just symbolic."

Never mind that the version of the Constitution read was not the original document, omitting the parts with which we have yet to come to terms as having been a part of our history. The parts, it may be observed, that were redressed by the 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments.</p>

*In honor of Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., whose [dream](http://www.npr.org/news/specials/march40th/speeches.html) we remember today.
