---
date: 2011-10-24 17:37:02
title: On Occupation
---

### Wall Street
With the chill of fall suddenly in the air, the prospect of a cold snap interrupting the settlement in Zuccotti Park becomes a reasonable subject of speculation. Not that miserable weather couldn't be overcome by the resolve and the resourcefulness that have been repeatedly demonstrated by the occupiers in New York's financial district; between donations of gloves and Gor-tex, and smart rotations of sleeping in the park, the occupation could very likely continue into the winter. In any case, even if it were to end tomorrow, it has lasted long enough to garner mainstream media attention and an (at least temporary) place in our collective social recall.

Without a standardized -- some might even say coherent -- list of demands, OWS has emerged as hybrid kind of 'be-in,' a mixture of civil-rights- and Vietnam-era 'put your body where you mean it' protests and the most diffuse, virtual kinds of activism. In the square itself, amplification is forbidden, but the crowds who make up the 'human microphone' also contain the folks whose Web savvy has given them a world-wide media presence that has allowed the movement to spread around the nation, the world, and even into [the virtual world](http://slartsparks.blogspot.com/2011/10/stock-upie.html).

The call from many quarters for the movement to formulate a more consistent message seem to reflect a naivety about the nature of protest in this Great Recession era. The Freedom Riders' (see this [stunning American Experience episode](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/freedomriders/)) very act of appearing was an act of protest, because the way they appeared -- in an integrated group traveling by bus across state lines -- was considered a crime. They embodied their demand; they were demanding the right to do what they were doing, and they did so at incredible risk to themselves. Though in a different context, the protests against the Vietnam war also represented a body-based claim; they showed up in order to protest the killing of young American men in an overseas conflict. While segregation and war are undoubtedly political issues, I perceive the resistance movements these travesties spawned as fundamentally different from what is interpreted today as political protest.

In a recent column, _New York Times_ columnist Nicholas Kristof proposes we "[Occupy the Classroom](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/20/opinion/occupy-the-classroom.html], by which he means expanding early childhood education.
> ... the question isn't whether we can afford early childhood education, but whether we can afford not to provide it. We can pay for prisons or we can pay, less, for early childhood education to help build a fairer and more equitable nation.

While of course Kristof is right that early childhood education is valuable, benefitting both the child and society overall, the idea that unequal opportunity -- in the sense of realizing one's individual potential through education -- is responsible for the economic situation we find ourselves in at this moment is downright risible. Although it is true that [an increasing number of students at the nation's top colleges are children of upper- or upper-middle class parents](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/23/opinion/sunday/social-inequality-and-the-new-elite.html?pagewanted=2), there are plenty of middle-class students who have earned a bachelor's degree -- often incurring surreal amounts of loan debt in the process -- who cannot find work. The lack of opportunity here is not merely, or even mainly, in the arena of education, but within that of employment. (I mean, do you need a B. A. to work at Target?) Americans are addicted to the notion (myth?) of self-betterment as the main ingredient in upward mobility, but in fact our history proves that while we remain committed to the principle of inclusion (i.e., equality of opportunity for all), we are not so motivated to reengineer the resulting wealth disparities (i.e., equality of condition). Indeed, despite the economic crisis, [wealth redistribution is still largely viewed as quintessentially un-American](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/23/opinion/sunday/social-inequality-and-the-new-elite.html?).

The inspiring part of Occupy Wall Street, for me, is its constructive embrace of futility. The protesters are neither desperate nor naive enough to think that their presence is going to bring down the financial system as we know it, or lead to massive, wealth-redistributing economic reforms. (Indeed, the only reforms it seems to be sparking are those related to the [regulation of privately-owned public spaces in New York City](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/20/opinion/zuccotti-park-and-the-private-plaza-problem.html?). In the yawning chasm of this intermission in the American Dream, they are building a meaningful meantime, a hands-on, face-to-face alternative to the virtual friending and self-promoting ahead-getting that has become the status quo among millennials. Outside of the rip current of Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn, they are meeting one another on the other, more personal, and more uncertain side of the accomplishment-equals-success equation.

Americans, who for better or worse, tend to define themselves by their jobs (especially by the fact that they are hard-working), are discovering in bigger numbers than in (almost) living memory what it means to live a full life that does not include regular (or sufficient, or gainful) employment. Until the first condition -- that of predictable employment -- is removed, no one thinks much of all the assumptions and practices that follow it, like obedient dominos toppling in mesmerizing, patriotic solidarity. There is a great incentive to mind one's own business, tired after a long week at the office, ready and able to indulge the family in a dinner and movie (the former delivered to the door, the latter to the TV). The naturalness of the nuclear family is confirmed as its continuance is perpetuated by the bi-weekly direct deposit of the paycheck. All is well in the (first) world.

Occupy Wall Street proves that different social structures are not just imaginable, but actually readily deployable. Anyone with an Internet connection can order Liberty Park's denizens-du-jour a pizza (including, from nearby [Liberatos Pizza](http://www.liberatospizza.com/Welcome.tpl") an OccuPie -- a cheese pizza with a strip of pepperoni across the middle, mimicking the 'no' symbol). Donations of clothes, materials, and cash have more or less spontaneously flowed. Granted, most of the people sleeping in the park have nearby homes to retreat to when the dirt and discomfort overwhelm, but to measure a movement's sincerity by a misguided standard of purity is to miss the entire point. OWS is not about helping the needy or proving a point through sleeping in the cold, but rather about showing up in a space that is neither home, nor school, nor work -- a space that has largely slipped the minds of most Americans, but one that will rise in importance as more as more Americans find themselves in it.

### Exchange
For many, the term 'occupation' cannot help bring to mind the long-standing conflict in the Middle East, symbolized by the [Occupied Palestinian Territories](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palestinian_territories)—that is the term used by the United Nations (and other international legal bodies) to refer to the West Bank (including East Jerusalem) and the Gaza Strip. Although peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians are stalled, recently [a prisoner exchange made the news](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/19/world/middleeast/israel-and-palestinians-begin-prisoner-exchange.html?).

On 18 October 2011, in a deal brokered in part by Egypt, Hamas released a 25-year old Israeli soldier, Gilad Shalit (who had been captured in 2006 in the Gaza Strip by Palestinian militants) in exchange for 1,000 Palestinian prisoners held by Israel. While the return of Shalit represents a rare moment of joy -- he is the first captured Israeli soldier returned alive in 26 years -- it is also a cause for concern, as it is feared that the released prisoners will resume the activities against Israel that prompted their initial imprisonment.

This moment of optimism for the families whose loved ones are being returned is underscored by the larger sense of futility in this conflict. The desire for "another Gilad Shalit" expressed by many during rallies in the West Bank and Gaza (in the hopes that similar exchanges could lead to the return of the remaining 5,000 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails) seems only to reinforce the idea that, despite the obvious effectiveness of negotiation, it is only conceivable as part of a conflict strategy. The possibility of peace seems simultaneously genuine and unrealistic, the ready practicalities of compromise overshadowed and overwhelmed by uncompromising principles.

### Busy Signal
Farm work is hard, and in Alabama these days there is a shortage of people willing and able to do it. This is the result of a [new law aimed at reducing the number of illegal immigrants in the state](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/29/us/alabama-immigration-law-upheld.html). The law, which took effect at the beginning of October, creates more penalties for people and companies who knowingly hire illegal immigrants, nullifies contracts entered into by illegal immigrants, forbids contracts between illegal immigrants and state agencies (such as those for water and sewage service), and requires law enforcement officials to try to verify the immigration status of a person during a routine traffic stop or arrest, if there is "reasonable suspicion" that the person is not here legally. Furthermore, although it is against federal law to deny public schooling to children, regardless of their immigration status, the new law requires primary and secondary schools in Alabama to determine students' status upon enrollment.

[The law has had immediate and substantial effects](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/20/opinion/its-what-they-asked-for.html?): Hispanics are disappearing from jobs, homes, and, the case of children, schools. Farmers are up-in-arms, having lost a workforce that they cannot easily—if at all—replace in time for fall's harvest and plantings. While it is convenient to take the attitude—as many in Alabama do—that people who are breaking the law should now run out of fear, the fear is not limited to the undocumented. After all, many families are of mixed immigration status, and even if you are legal, the climate the law has produced cannot be very reassuring. If you were walking down the street or driving in your car on a regular day, could you prove your citizenship or demonstrate your legal presence in this country? I don't even have a copy of my birth certificate handy, and I only carry my passport when I'm headed for foreign shores.

The fact is, the most law-abiding citizen among us relies upon and benefits from the work that illegal immigrants do in this country. They not only keep food coming in from the fields, they make sure that the prices we pay for it are low. The idea that if we got rid of illegal immigrants, everyone in this country who wanted one would have a job is so simplistic as to be laughable -- the federal government already operates a migrant worker program precisely because there aren't enough Americans who will work in the fields. And just this morning I heard [a farmer in Alabama freely admit on the radio](http://www.npr.org/2011/10/24/141638999/labor-worries-rise-as-planting-season-nears-in-ala)that he preferred not to hire workers through the program, which mandates higher wages and requires that the farmer provide housing "approved by the government." I hate to spoil the party line, but for some folks, being against government intervention means being in favor of illegal immigration.

Did you notice that Mitt Romney, in the recent Republican Presidential Candidates debate, when accused of having "illegals" (Rick Perry's slur-like term, at least to my ear) working on his property as part of the landscape service he used, didn't even address the overall issue of undocumented workers, but focused only on the cosmetic problem of a politician being caught touching, to to speak, this sore spot? Basically, to paraphrase, he said/implied: "Why would I knowingly hire illegal immigrants when I know that it is going to be used against me to make me look bad? What, do you think I'm stupid?" Rick Perry accused Romney of hypocrisy on this issue, but the hypocrite here is actually Perry: everyone, including Perry, knows that illegal immigrants live and work in this country -- heck, Perry himself passed a state law in Texas allowing them to pay in-state college tuition! While politicians are known to be more careful about keeping up appearances when it comes to their personal employment practices, such care is often not out of morality or patriotism, but political self-preservation.

We all know that there is work for illegal immigrants in this country, either because Americans aren't willing to do those jobs, or because employers aren't willing to pay the money that Americans would like -- or, as is sadly the case, that minimum-wage laws mandate. But instead of admitting these facts and trying to change the system that has begat them, we demonize and even dehumanize people who risk their lives to enter this country from points south in order to fill these jobs. Do you think Herman Cain was joking, as he later claimed, when he said he would [build a fence (along the border with Mexico) that could kill would-be immigrants by electrocution](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/16/us/politics/bachmann-and-cain-deliver-blistering-attacks-on-illegal-immigration.html?)? Do you think that Michele Bachman wants to build a ["secure double fence" and make the government's official language English](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/16/us/politics/bachmann-and-cain-deliver-blistering-attacks-on-illegal-immigration.html?) because she is fearful of marauding Canadians with accents, or, heaven forfend, the knowledge of French? You can dress up immigration concerns all you like in economic rationales, but these recent comments certainly leave a racist, xenophobic taste in my mouth.

Sometime within this decade, [the majority of people under 18 in this country will no longer be white](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/06/us/06census.html?ref=census). Before the midpoint of this century, [Caucasians will no longer comprise the majority of the overall U.S. population](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/06/us/06census.html?ref=census). If the GOP wants to get elected, it needs to get real: instead of [alienating Hispanic voters](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/20/us/politics/immigration-talk-turns-off-some-hispanics.html?), it should be courting them.

It's time to get out of this occupation mentality, and get busy treating people as people, and problems as problems. No one benefits when we get the two confused.
