---
date: 2011-11-23 18:08:29
title: On Overreaching
---

> I really didn't want to be here today and wouldn't have been here if it had not been for the three other women who have alleged sexual harassment against Mr. Cain. I want you, Mr. Cain, to come clean. Just admit what you did. Admit you were inappropriate to people, and then move forward. America is in a horrible turmoil as we all know. We need a leader who can set an example which exemplifies the standards of a good person and moral character. Mr. Cain, I implore you, make this right so that you and the country can move forward and focus on the real issues at hand. Thank you.
#### —[Susan Bialek, 7 Nov 2011](http://www.politico.com/news/stories/1111/67772_Page2.html)

### Free at Last
At first I was delighted that Herman Cain's serial sexual harassment of women took a toll on his popularity. But as Newt Gingrich supplanted him as the front-runner for the GOP presidential nomination, my delight turned back to dismay. Not that I thought Cain's workplace misdeeds disqualified him to be President. His arrogance, ignorance, inexperience, and conservatism-poorly-disguised-as-populism disqualify him—or at least would, if we weren't living in the topsy-turvy political world known as the Republican Presidential Nomination Process, aka, the Race to the Bottom of the Barrel.

I actually watched the hour of the debate on November 12 that was televised on CBS. And the only candidate that seemed even remotely humble, reasonable, and knowledgeable enough to belong on that stage is Jon Huntsman, whom most people probably haven't even heard of. The other major candidates could have been bested by prep-school debaters, in terms of polish, directness, and knowledge of the subject matter.

We are in a new era of overreach, in which people believe in their own competence too readily and assert their own adequacy too fervently. Michelle Bachman's tragic flaw of believing the idiotic things she hears (e.g., the woman who told her the HPV vaccine can cause mental retardation) is not a simple gullibility—it is an unfortunate side effect of having imbibed her own Kool-Aid: she believes everything she thinks.

Herman Cain, on the other hand, is a straight-up case of self-promoting puffery. Nobody but Fox was paying attention at this point, but in his announcement of his candidacy, he compared his reaching the White House to the achievement of civil rights, quoting—and [this you really have to see to believe](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QoBH8a_HgyM)—Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.

Unlike Ms. Bialek, I don't want Herman Cain to come clean about his misconduct and move forward. I want him to get back onto the motivational-book-tour bus he rode in on and disappear into an endorsement sunset. He can call Sarah Palin and talk talk show possibilities. While I don't excuse sexual misconduct, I don't believe that one's moral conduct is correlated to one's professional skills. While Bill Clinton clearly had his share of peccadillos (some welcomed by women, others perhaps less so), he also was an intelligent, experienced, and credible politician, and an above-average President. Sure he overreached, but at least he didn't underwhelm.

### "If you see something, say something"
The other day, I was driving home from the grocery store and I was waiting for a left-arrow light, and the car in front of me, driven by an older lady, had the gas tank door open and the lid off. It was one of those lids that's kept connected to the car by a plastic ring, so you can't lose it. Still, it's not good to be driving like that. And so I'm stopped behind her and the light is red, and I'm thinking "What do I do?" Do I honk and try to indicate the problem? Do I jump out and try to get her attention, or just go over and fix it, and hope I don't startle her, or startle myself by trying to put the lid on a gas tank of a car that could start moving again at any moment? Do I do nothing and trust it'll be okay, figuring that the driver or someone else will—eventually—notice the problem?

Granted, seeing a car with a dangling gas cap is not like seeing a young boy being raped in the shower, but this little incident did give me a tiny glimpse into the deciding mind. It is easy enough to know when we see something that is amiss, and because we are so good at discernment, it is easy to mistake this ability for the separate skill of responding, of acting based on the information we have received.

As [David Brooks points out](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/15/opinion/brooks-lets-all-feel-superior.html), it is pretty easy to imagine ourselves making a better choice when we witness what we appear to be someone's failing. But while he would chalk it up to our inflated sense of "inner wonderfulness"—the result of decades of pop-psych pump-up of the American ego—I think that the reverse phenomenon is partially to blame. In contrast to the display of arrogance and ignorance that is the pack of Republican presidential candidates, I think that many times when we do not act when we see something wrong, it is not because we doubt its wrongness, but because we doubt the effectiveness of our response. What if we make the situation worse, not only for the person we intend to help, but also for ourselves? This is not merely a craven fear of the pusillanimous, but rather an extension of a natural and indeed healthy self-doubt, a recognition of our limitations to change the course of events set in motion and often abetted by others in positions of authority.

Whatever our own hesitations to cry foul, we are certainly quick to express our outrage at the overreach of a pedophile: we promptly dismiss him as abnormal, suffering from a sickness, a perversion. But the disgusting overreach of the pedophile is just the other side of the coin of the gilded overreach we foster in those we put on pedestals. Perhaps Joe Paterno once had a reasonable opinion of himself. Clearly at some point, though, he started to drink the Kool-Aid manufactured by the denizens of Happy Valley, becoming the heroic and infallible JoePa they so much wanted him to be. He believed in his benevolent reign so much so that when Mike McQueary told him about an unmistakable act of abuse at the very heart of his realm, his response was to ask Jerry Sandusky not to bring children into the locker room—as if an immoral act, once removed from his fiefdom, would simply cease to exist.

### Supercommittee, Epic Fail
I wish someone could explain to me why the Republicans are so opposed to raising taxes to deal with the national debt. I get the whole "starve the beast" tactic—force government to downsize by denying it revenue—but if one is so concerned about the debt, shouldn't one propose tax increases precisely to pay it off? This leads me to think rather cynically about the Grover Norquist tax pledge—it's not just an ideological [chastity belt, as David Brooks suggested](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/22/opinion/brooks-the-two-moons.html), but a lock rich people want to put on their own wallets.

If the Republicans believe that government should be smaller, then they should say so. They should feel free to argue that we should spend less because they don't believe in paying for government agencies whose names they can't remember (I mean you, Rick Perry) and because they'd prefer not to pay for medical care and give out pensions (aka Social Security). Except, of course, when it comes to their health insurance and their pensions.

The Supreme Court has agreed to hear the cases challenging [the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act's mandate](http://www.scotusblog.com/?p=131544) that everyone purchase health insurance. The plaintiffs assert that you cannot force someone to engage in comercial activity, as if to demand that everyone participate in order to make the system work for the benefit of all is some sort of anti-democratic overreach. And yet this is a country whose history is marked by desperate struggles for the the right to participate: the Civil War, the Suffragettes, the civil rights movement, the push for marriage equality.

Overreach is precisely what people accused Franklin D. Roosevelt of when he proposed Social Security, unemployment insurance, and the various programs of the New Deal. But if you are not a believer in government being an active force in society, why are you in government at all? Just to stop the madness? How is it exactly that someone can seek to be part of the government on the principle that they should be paid to participate in something they feel is overgrown and wasteful? And how is it that people can continue to vote for these folks? "Vote for me—I will make sure the government gets smaller and spends less of your money!" Less of my money on whom? Not on you, I'm guessing.

If someone really believed government was wasteful, he would distance himself from it, not get on the payroll to rant and rave about how wasteful it is. Or, if he must get involved, why doesn't he agree to work for free, save the suffering taxpayers some cash? Or agree to buy his health insurance out-of-pocket, instead of letting the government pick up the tab? Or decline his pension? But no. They are collecting their paychecks, accruing their pensions, and ranting about the debt. And meanwhile, they are not doing anything to alleviate the joblessness, increasing poverty, and growing income inequality in America.

It is a syllogism of the most cynical kind to claim that the debt prevents the government from giving jobs to Americans who want to earn a living and contribute to society. The debt, as the Eurozone crisis has demonstrated, is a problem, and it must be faced. But frankly, what stops us from putting Americans to work is merely our lack of willingness to do so. For a capitalist, buying labor-power only makes sense when this labor-power can create surplus value. People, however, still need the means to procure food, shelter, clothing, and care. If we don't believe in granting these means based on the simple principle of life meriting sustenance, then work—considered the normative means to meet these needs—must be granted the status of a human right.

This is what FDR understood when he designed the New Deal. He understood that people intrinsically had something to offer, whether they were masons or musicians, engineers or engine repairmen. And he created the opportunities for these people to offer their services, their talent, their labor, simply because they were there and they needed this opportunity.

If this rhetoric now falls on mostly deaf ears, if it sounds socialist or communist or anti-democratic, we would do well to consider whether the empty-headed overreach of each successive front-runner for the GOP nomination sounds any better. It certainly doesn't to me.
