---
date: 2012-12-21 20:56:17
title: On Failure, or the End of the World
---

> The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun. 
#### —Wayne LaPierre, CEO of the National Rifle Association

> There's always people who want there to be an apocalypse. 
#### —David Morrison, Senior Scientist of the NASA Astrobiology Institute 

### The Fox News Effect
So Mitt Romney lost, and the only people surprised were me and the conservative media establishment, the former who had feared Romney's victory, the latter who had predicted it. While the facile philosophy of "you can do anything if you just try hard enough" is still common enough pablum fed to schoolchildren in our idealist quest to believe in the equality of opportunity in an increasingly obviously unequal society, it's another thing to construct a right-wing propaganda machine disguised as a journalistic empire—and then start to believe the spin <!--more-->you're trying to sell to everyone else.

As we all jump into our barrels to enjoy our ride over the so-called fiscal cliff, you'd be forgiven if you thought that the Republicans had won after all, given the way Boehner and GOP caucus is holding out on not raising taxes. Apparently, they [missed the memo](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/15/us/politics/redistricting-helped-republicans-hold-onto-congress.html?pagewanted=all&amp;_r=0) that informed the rest of us that the reason they held on to as many seats as they did in the House has to do not with a mandate for 2012, but Congressional district lines drawn (read: gerrymandered) in such a way that even the wildest of swing voter trends could not move them from red to blue. That's not a mandate, guys, that's a foregone conclusion.

### Overexposed
While it hasn't been confirmed whether the heir and the spare are on their way together, it has been announced, to the delight of many, that The Duchess of Cambridge is now expecting. While it is the destiny of all members of the royal family to be hounded by the media, one can only imagine the digital record that will be created around the life of this next little prince or princess. While perhaps living in the public eye from an early age is an appropriate element of training for a life of public service, I am tempted to believe that privacy is fundamental to the sound development of our fragile egos. We need the safety of solitude, the protections of family and intimate relationships, in order to cope with our many imperfections — in order to learn to bear them, and ourselves, with grace. I may tease my mother about not being on Facebook, but on the other hand, I'm glad I can't go back and see what she posted when I lost my first tooth.

Forgiveness, especially self-forgiveness, is like a muscle, and I think of privacy as the gym where we strengthen it. This way, when we experience one of life's unfortunate faceplants in front of the world, we can get up, dust ourselves off, and move forward, rather than succumbing to shame or sadness. While the details are scarce, I imagine that this is what happened, unfortunately, to the poor nurse at King Edward VII Hospital, Jacintha Saldanha, who apparently took her own life after an embarrassing episode at work.

Apparently, while the Duchess was being treated for extreme morning sickness, Saldanha had the misfortune of answering a prank call from two Australian disc jockeys who impersonated the Queen and Prince Charles in order to obtain information about Kate Middleton. She transfered the call, apparently, to a nurse directly involved in the Duchess's care. The following day, she took her own life.

As Allison Pearson observes in [_The Telegraph_](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/columnists/allison-pearson/9745539/Jacintha-a-caring-innocent-caught-in-the-crossfire.html), her suicide very likely would not have happened had Saldanha been able to soothe her shame away in the comfort of her family — but she lived in London for work, while her husband and children were in Bristol.

> 'I've done the most terrible thing,' she could have said to her husband, Ben Barboza. A solid, dependable accountant, he would have reassured his wife that it wasn't her fault. The hospital would understand. Besides, there were far worse things than being duped by a pair of Aussie prats. Jacintha's two teenage children would have been getting ready for school, snatching up toast, bags and coats. Their beloved faces would have reminded their mother that, however humiliated or upset she felt, it wasn't the end of the world. We make mistakes and, yet, life goes on.

Indeed, life does go on, and Jacintha's life very likely would have gone on to include a call from the Duchess herself, expressing her sympathies. After all, a woman whose breasts have been spread all over the world as paparazzi fodder could have nothing other than compassion for a woman feeling the shame of overexposure.

### Doomsday Blues
So the world didn't end today — although it appears that at least one person has had his brains attacked and occupied by zombies. That man is Wayne LaPierre, who today [gave a response](http://current.com/groups/news-blog/93998035_word-cloud-nra-ceo-lapierres-statement-full-text.htm) to the Sandy Hook Elementary School shootings that set a new standard for its cultural ignorance and political tone-deafness.

LaPierre first ran through the standard litany of old-school conservative complaints that blamed the entire situation on liberals: 1) there an unknown number of crazy, evil people out there (because liberals refuse to let us make a national database of the mentally ill); 2) there isn't enough law enforcement (because liberals are soft on crime); and 3) there is a "callous, corrupt and corrupting shadow industry that sells, and sows, violence against its own people" — liberal Hollywood.

But the CEO saved the best part for last: the proposal for the federal government to pay for an armed security guard in every school in America. Never mind the [estimated cost of $5.5 billion](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2012/12/21/cop_in_every_school_how_much_would_wayne_lapierre_s_proposal_cost.html) (maybe a gun tax to pay for it?), what do you want to bet that one of those "good" guns harms someone before it prevents harm to someone? Even if we could predict or guarantee the efficacy of such an initiative, do you want your children seeing a guy (or gal) with a gun every single schoolday of his or her life? (Wait, is this a secret recruitment tool for the NRA? Hmm...)

The thing is, as eager as LaPierre is to call simulated violence (in movies, videogames, etc.) the "filthiest form of pornography," he's as caught up in its spell as any of the people he disparages for making or enjoying gun violence in entertainment. (And by the way, the English watch the same movies and play the same video games we do, but don't suffer nearly the same rate of gun violence.) The only difference with LaPierre's obsession is that he's the hero, rather than the villain. And this, too, is a deep trend in American culture — our military is the best armed in the world, and we are consistently instructed to consider all our troops as heroes, not just service members. Heroes and guns are as linked today as villains and guns. As the Boy Scout motto went, "be prepared."

And so we are reminded that no one, not even a culture's critics, are outside of it. We _all_ belong to the American cultural moment of the rampage shooting — people like me, who recognize that gun violence may take my life or the life of someone I know at anytime, anywhere, and those like LaPierre, who feel safe because they have a gun, too. (I wouldn't want a gun, and I wouldn't feel safer having one.) Put simply, I'm the person who ignores the video game, and LaPierre is — don't let all his criticism fool you! — the one who wants to play it.
