---
date: 2012-09-01 15:36:32
title: On Self-Fucking
---

> Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, all of you according to your ways, says the lord God. Repent and turn from all your transgressions; otherwise iniquity will be your ruin. Cast away from you all the transgressions that you have committed against me, and get yourselves a new heart and a new spirit! Why will you die, O house of Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of anyone, says the Lord God. Turn, then, and live. 
#### —Ezekiel 18:30-32

### Talking to the chair
[Clint Eastwood went off script the other night](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qiHNVYRTKP8), and perhaps a bit off the rails, too. Granted, he's old. Granted, famous people are allowed more liberty than the rest of us. But the standard acting class gimmick of empty chairs and the implication of a real conversation has to be the saddest metaphor of all for politics in our times.

Sure, my memories are fuzzy, but I seem to recall the days when the Republicans got together every four years and made the Democrats look bad by calling them soft-hearted: too willing to tax and spend on misguided programs, too dovish on foreign policy. It made liberalism seem weak, almost pitiful, and while that's not a liberal's view of liberalism, [Obama said it best in his keynote address to the 2004 DNC](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eWynt87PaJ0), such a presentation at least bore some relationship to the actual positions of the two respective parties. 

Now, reality has left the building, leaving only an empty chair and a rambling actor to put words in its mouth. I'm not talking about the [pink slip Paul Ryan gave to the truth](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/31/us/politics/ryans-speech-contained-a-litany-of-falsehoods.html) this convention, or [Romney's failure to pay even lip service](http://www.weeklystandard.com/blogs/what-war_651279.html) to the ongoing war in Afganistan in his acceptance speech. While both of those distortions are [understandable from the point of view of political expediency](http://www.thedailyshow.com/watch/thu-august-30-2012/rnc-2012---the-road-to-jeb-bush-2016---we-can-change-that), the truly mind-blowing bit is Clint Eastwood's announcement that he moved to tears by the "disgrace" of America's 23 million unemployed.

This figure is, regrettably, accurate. The reality-bending parts are: 1) that this is a Hollywood actor announcing this at the _Republican_ National Convention; 2) that the charge levied against the Obama administration is that it hasn't done enough to address the situation; and 3) that the GOP's idea of a government solving the unemployment problem is precisely NOT for the government to stimulate the economy or create jobs. By that logic, the fact that the Democrats have been prevented from passing more stimulus and/or employment bills by the obstruction-crazed House Republicans should be prompting praise from the GOP! Look! We're getting our way! We're preventing Obama from not solving this problem through government intervention! Vote for us and we'll solve this problem by... doing more of the same?

If Clint Eastwood had stopped at his suggestion that "it may be time for somebody else to come along and solve the problem," he would have fulfilled his promise to speak for three minutes and have delivered, if not a terribly convincing endorsement of Romney, at least a heartfelt one. Instead, Eastwood launches into his rambling pretend interview with the President, talking about Obama's failure to close Gitmo, his initial attempt to try suspected terrorists on American soil, his approval of the war in Afghanistan (which Clint seems to imply was a stupid idea, which, of course it was: the stupid idea of Bush fils)—all of this interspersed with implied insults from the empty chair, including Obama asking Eastwood to tell Romney to go fuck himself.

### Uterus knows best
While one could construe these references to self-copulation as the staging of the [Angry Black Man](http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/09/fear-of-a-black-president/309064/) that Barack Obama has never, for obvious reasons, been allowed to be, one could also interpret this most-satisfying of physically impossible insults as a revealing metaphor of the Republican Party's body-centered notion of America's fate and its current frustrations. America, the glorious body that the GOP want desperately to redeem, contains the very forces that have led to its iniquities. Thus the party is compelled to both praise and blame, driven to extol an American greatness that is eternal yet at the same time gravely threatened.

The comparison between a nation and a body (usually female) is at least as old as the Old Testament, and certainly the GOP has no shortage of things to say about the female body, including Representative Todd Akin's now-infamous [belief in mental birth control](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/24/opinion/the-medieval-roots-of-todd-akins-theories.html). Putting aside its inaccuracy and its denial of the most basic personal rights to women, what better metaphor could there be to express the hopes of the GOP: America can remain great and pure despite her penetration from outside impurities! Her innate wisdom (thank God!) provides a way of stopping invasive iniquity before she is corrupted. Whether this outside is for you Obama the Kenyan-born, Obama the Muslim, Obama the Black Man, or Obama the Socialist hardly matters: what matters is the concept of adulteration, and while the GOP may not have succeeded at doing anything else in the last 4 years, they have certainly succeeded in branding liberalism as an anathema, something that is not truly American.

### Two body problem
Abby and Brittany Hensel, conjoined identical twins born in 1990, are now 22 years old, completing college, and [starring in a reality show on TLC](http://tlc.howstuffworks.com/tv/abby-and-brittany/videos). While you or I could probably not imagine sharing our body with another person, the Hensel women have known nothing different since birth, and thus make the coordination required for their daily existence look effortless and natural. They are two distinct people, but they often speak in unison or complete the other's sentences, appearing to know somehow what the other is thinking. The amount of compromise that is necessary for them to have any kind of life is simply astounding -- let alone the thriving, dare-I-say 'normal' life that this and [previous filmic interventions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abigail_and_Brittany_Hensel#Media_appearances) capture. They are good at compromise not because they are naturally predisposed, but because they have both no choice and also a lifetime of practice.

When they were younger, my mother once suggested that the Hensel twins should be mediators, unique experts on compromise that they are. Instead, the twins are pursuing a career in elementary education, with complete understanding that while they will be doing the job of one person (and thus will, at least initially, receive one salary), they will do it differently than one person would do it, as they have two minds, two degrees, and two perspectives. They are experts at appearing in a world that may not initially know how to interpret or accomodate them, and thus are unlikely to fear the curious eyes and minds of young school children.

To suggest that our political process could learn something from the unique experience of these women would require the dismantling of the one-body-America metaphor that has proven so seductive. After all, not terribly long ago, the image of a woman with two heads, two hearts, two legs, and one reproductive system would have suggested only monstrosity, perversion, unnaturalness. And yet if you see the Hensel twins, you will know that this could not be further from the truth.

On neither the human nor the political body is the normal inherently inscribed. If reality TV is any indication, there are no more freaks; differences are merely marketing opportunities. The GOP used to be the party of the Big Tent, offering a place under the bigtop to all who believed in the principle that less was more; less government intervention meant greater economic productivity and increased resilience of the social fabric. These are honorable ideals, but ranting about the sacred creativity (in the job sense) of small business owners and the need for (still) lower taxes on the already-rich doesn't seem like an invitation to a circus of acceptance to me.

"We built it," they cry. The rest of us... can go fuck ourselves.
