---
layout: post
date: 2012-03-17 15:14:11
title: On Paper
---

> You shall observe my statutes and faithfully keep my ordinances, so that you may live on the land securely. The land will yield its fruit, and you will eat your fill and live on it securely. \[...\] The land shall not be sold in perpetuity, for the land is mine; with me you are but aliens and tenants. Throughout the land that you hold, you shall provide for the redemption of the land. 
#### —Leviticus 25: 18-19, 23-24

### Forest from the trees
Is there [a bit of the Indonesian forest in your bathroom](http://wamu.org/news/12/02/22/virginia_paper_company_linked_with_rainforest_destruction)? There might be, if in fact the supplier Asian Pulp and Paper is using rainforest trees (some from land that they have set aside for a tiger sanctuary) as raw materials for its paper products—including that _indispensible_ disposable rolled up next to your commode. This classic we-said-they-said environmental controversy (the company denies the WWF's claim) got me thinking about the meaning of uncertainty, and the nature of imponderables past and present.<!--more--> Somehow, I see an important shift between wondering about the origins of the world and human life and contemplating whether my nether regions are contributing to deforestation. 

The shift is not ultimately one of scale, or even one of received truth versus observed truth (à la religion vs. science). No, the shift is more subtle and has to do with what one might call harmonious authority. Harmonious authority exists where received knowledge takes the form of inspiration and instruction. It is authority conceived not as the suppression of logic or liberty, but as the source thereof. By harmonious I don't mean happy or feel-good, but I do mean functioning in a generative capacity. 

This notion describes rather well I think the instructions given by God via Moses in the Torah as to how the people of Israel are to set themselves apart so that He will dwell in their midst. Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy contain extensive lists of commandments and instructions. Famously, the Israelites complain during their time in the wilderness, longing for the certain comforts of life in Egypt, despite their status as slaves. (And in His wrath, God decides that everyone of that complaining generation will perish in the wilderness and never see the promised land.) 

In short, the Old Testament makes clear that Israel isn't 'chosen' because its people are better, but because God made a promise to its ancestors and intends to honor it — even if it means dwelling within a community that is, like all human communities, imperfect (sinful). While the direct presence of God in the formation of this community should not be overlooked, I suspect that the local orientation of God's intervention is of equal importance. The days of the tabernacle emphasize the importance of this locality, as the tabernacle was designed to travel with Israel on its way to the land that God has designated for them. The material objects mandated for the tabernacle and its contents, and the fact that the Israelites are able to acquire and and construct them, lend a important local intimacy to Israel's rigorous worship practices. 

The difficulties of the environmentally-conscious consumer are of an entirely different order, and thus not easily inserted into this Biblical picture of locality and its harmonious authority. I cannot imagine what it would have been like to live in an ancient community where worship revolved around animal sacrifice — but I'm certain that it would seem equally strange to such a community to receive the articles of one's daily life from the other side of the globe. The strangeness of each to the other is real. While I suspect that Rick Santorum was trying (and failing) to score cheap political points when he mouthed off rather senselessly about Obama's "[phony theology](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/19/us/politics/santorum-criticizes-education-system-and-obama.html)," I think that many people feel a genuine discomfort with the nature of our modern problems, particularly those regarding the environment. The idea that you can contribute to the destruction of the rainforest with a thoughtless wipe of your you-know-what flies in the face of the admittedly comforting notion that our dominion over the natural world is part of God's harmonious authority. Perhaps there exists an unconscious nostalgia for the reassurance provided by the local nature of God's presence — in both his blessing and his wrath — that cannot be matched by the surveyors of the rainforest, despite the verifiable urgency of their concerns. 

The real problem isn't, I think, as Santorum put it, that the ["world view" of Obama et al. "elevates the earth above man,"](http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2012/02/santorum-phony-theology-referred-to-obamas-world-view-not-his-religion/) but rather the scary prospect that we may no longer be in a position to put ourselves first without leading to our own destruction. Faced with the disturbing possibility that banning abortions and gay marriage isn't enough to ensure our continued prosperity as a nation (and species), it is surely a whole lot easier to [deny global warming as the hoax](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/29/opinion/republicans-against-science.html) of those unreassuring secular types. And to [keep passing laws restricting abortion](http://www.npr.org/blogs/health/2012/01/19/145465011/new-restrictions-on-abortion-almost-tied-record-last-year) and [gay rights](http://www.wjla.com/articles/2012/02/virginia-senate-votes-to-pass-gay-adoption-discrimination--72864.html). (Console yourself with Jon Stewart's recent remarks on [Chris Christi's same-sex marriage veto](http://www.thedailyshow.com/watch/tue-february-21-2012/chris-christie-s-gay-marriage-bill-veto) and [Virginia's mandatory ultrasound bill](http://www.thedailyshow.com/watch/tue-february-21-2012/punanny-state---virginia-s-transvaginal-ultrasound-bill).)

### Burning rage
If the fact that we've occupied their country for a decade now weren't cause an adequate cause for Afghan aggrievement, the US military has certainly done the trick by carelessly burning several copies of the Koran at a NATO base in Bagram, Afghanistan. The resulting outrage has already claimed the lives of nearly a dozen protesters around the country as well as [four American soldiers](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/26/world/asia/afghanistan-koran-burning-protests-enter-fifth-day.html): two were shot on Feb. 23 by a Afghan Army soldier at a base in the eastern part of the country, and two more who were shot execution style on Feb. 25, inside a supposedly secure area of the Interior Ministry in Kabul. (The suspect is an employee in one of the departments in the Interior Ministry.) If President Obama's formal apology over the Koran burning was issued to prevent this kind of response, it does not seem to have helped. Martine Van Bijlert, a co-director of the Afghanistan Analysts Network, [quoted in the Times](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/25/world/asia/afghan-protests-over-koran-burning-break-out-in-kabul.html), said that "the violence is almost within the normal realm of things that you would see after this kind of incident," a statement one hardly knows whether to take with incredulity or profound disappointment.

While I can scarcely imagine the anger and frustration that results from over a decade of foreign occupation, and one can sympathize with the Afghan people who have been victimized as a result of the actions of others (the Saudi terrorists of 911, the Afghan Taliban who harbored Osama bin Laden), there is something disturbing about the idea that the action of burning the Koran -- regardless of its circumstances -- can reliably trigger such a response. Is it the general outrage at America or the values it represents so overwhelming as to short-circuit any circumstantial consideration? Granted, after ten years, American forces should know how to handle religious texts and items as to avoid adding insult to the injuries of occupation, but is it therefore impossible for anyone to rationalize that, given how poorly such an action serves the Americans' own interests, that it must have indeed been a hideous oversight rather than a willful provocation? 

Or is this distinction truly irrelevant? And if so, what does that mean about the nature of belief, and the function of outrage in relation to it? I don't presume to have any answers to these big questions, but I think that this problematic is fundamental to the present historical moment. It is precisely the space between this rock and hard place that Rick Santorum found himself in the final (phew!) Republican debate last week when he was confronted about the divergence between his personal views about contraception and his public stance in regard to legislation. Specifically, he finds himself attacked by both Ron Paul and Mitt Romney for voting for the standard omnibus appropriations bill because it includes funding for Planned Parenthood. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IoFfUg8YtC0&t=52m44s 

In the first part of this clip, you find Ron Paul making what seems like a very unlibertarian-like argument about defunding Planned Parenthood. Doctor that he is, he schools us on the fact that the so-called 'morning after pill' is identical to birth control, which means that you can't restrict the former without restricting the latter. Somehow he gets from here to the notion that, if you give money to Planned Parenthood to buy birth control, they subsequently have more money "left over" with which to do abortions. Huh? The audience cheers at his call to defund Planned Parenthood entirely, presumably because of its pro-life sympathies. But when Rick Santorum tries to defend himself about voting for the bill that includes Title X by talking about Title XX, which establishes federal funding for abstinence programs, Paul finally shows his hand by also objecting to Title XX on the grounds that all these kinds of programs overstep the Constitutional mandate of the federal government. 

Although that notion receives some applause from the crowd, Romney returns to the real task at hand, which is making Santorum look like a hypocrite for not voting against every single bill that involves a policy with which he doesn't entirely agree. This is sophistry at its highest, but it works: there are audible boos as Santorum tries to parse out the definitive nature of his personal stance and the more pragmatic quality of his legislative record. While a reasonable person would point out that it is the height of ridiculousness to purport that the ideal politician is one who votes the way he _personally_ feels about an issue, and that anyone who doesn't do this in every case is a hypocrite or a horrid 'flip-flopper', this argument isn't available to Santorum, because he himself subscribes to the politician-as-moral-crusader model. By that measure, he's damned (haha) whatever he does, because if he's coming for our birth control, the center calls him an extremist, and if he isn't, the right calls him a liberal. 

So much for the notion that an elected official is a representative of the will of the people! So much for the political realities of legislative Washington and the art of compromise! It makes one shake one's head in disbelief, this thick-headedness. To think that fifty years ago people worried that JFK's Catholicism would render him representative of the papacy and not an independent actor. Now the Republicans are slinging mud at Santorum for the exact opposite reason. And Santorum has no comeback; stranded as he is on the exposed cliff that is the moral high ground, he can only rant and rave ridiculously. [Watch him on ABC's This Week](http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2012/02/rick-santorum-jfks-1960-speech-made-me-want-to-throw-up/) (skip to 12:59) as he discusses his reaction to [Kennedy's famous speech](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iDP4qrA8hvg) about the separation between church and state with repeated references to vomiting. Yes, you read that right -- it makes Santorum want to throw up that Kennedy, faced with suspicion surrounding his religious affiliation, affirmed his commitment to the 'absolute' separation between church and state. [Kennedy says](http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=16920600):

> I believe in an America that is officially neither Catholic, Protestant nor Jewish; where no public official either requests or accepts instructions on public policy from the Pope, the National Council of Churches or any other ecclesiastical source; where no religious body seeks to impose its will directly or indirectly upon the general populace or the public acts of its officials; and where religious liberty is so indivisible that an act against one church is treated as an act against all.

It is rather shocking how polemical these words now sound in the present political context. The woeful misunderstanding (or, if you are more cynical) purposeful manipulation by politicians like Santorum has turned Kennedy's point on its head. While Kennedy was attempting to reassure a majority Protestant country that his religion did not exhaustively define him, Santorum somehow manages to it read it as an ejection of any faith-professing person from the public sphere. He opines:

> The idea that the church can have no influence or no involvement in the operation of the state is absolutely antithetical to the objectives and vision of our country. This is a First Amendment -- the First Amendment says the free exercise of religion. That means bringing everybody, people of faith and no faith, into the public square.

It is laughable to throw the First Amendment in there, as if the right to practice a religion (or no religion) of one's choosing is identical to its deployment in politics. It is Kennedy's argument that properly reflects this notion of religious freedom, in that he is asking the public not to hold his (private) faith against him in his quest for (public) office. That said, I have absolutely no doubt that this discourse strikes a rich vein in contemporary America, where a latter-day discomfort with non-Protestants has morphed into a fear of a secular notion of civil governance. Heaven forfend that children find out about _that_ idea in public school! (Which is exactly where the "millions of Americans" whom George Stephanopoulos mentions as having read Kennedy's speech did so.)

### Out of print
To many on both sides of the political spectrum, it appears that the Republicans are running a 21st-century campaign from a 20th- or even 19th-century playbook. They've gotten out-of-date and are going off the rails. This is the argument of Maureen O'Dowd's latest laughing assessment of the nomination race, in which she dubs the GOP the "[Ghastly Outdated Party](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/26/opinion/sunday/dowd-ghastly-outdated-party.html)," remarking that is "living posthumously" and "fighting battles on sex, race, immigration and public education long ago won by the other side." While for many of us these issues do indeed feel settled, it is probably only because we simply don't feel unsettled by non-procreational sex or same-sex marriage. 

Although I think both are defensible in terms of civil rights (right to privacy, right to equality under the law), I don't trace my personal comfort with these things to an emotionless analysis of the legal questions. I simply don't feel that there is anything wrong with sex for pleasure or love between two people of the same gender. There is no more explaining this than there is explaining the opposite but equally visceral viewpoint. Or if there is, I'm not going to attempt it. 

What I will venture to suppose, however, is that those like Santorum who are offended and worried by the sexual mores of the larger culture are not simply old-fashioned. There is something uniquely modern about their concerns, if for no other reason than the fact that they are having these concerns in a modern world. It is a much different proposition to be against homosexual relationships in today's world than it was a generation ago, just as it is undeniably different to _be_ in a homosexual relationship now than it was then. 

To dismiss people's discomfort, or fear, or outrage, or bigotry as merely a remnant from a less tolerant time is to mistake the unique nature of the present, which is not simply a more enlightened version of the past, but something wholly new. Many objects and practices morph in ways that simultaneously incorporate the new while maintaining vestiges of the old. And there is even a word for this in the design world: [skeuomorph](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skeuomorph). I am now involved in the production of a magazine that will be read only online, even though I am laying it out using the same type of software I used while managing editor of my college newspaper, which literally 'went to press' weekly and was distributed solely in paper copy. (We had email in college, but the Internet was not a daily presence in our academic or personal lives.) The neat websites that exist to 'publish' these magazines offer both modern conveniences (internal and external links) and the comforts of old, namely full-screen views that use gradients and shadow to give the look of an open magazine, and even the appropriate sound effect when you 'turn' the page.

Even the old can be new again.