---
date: 2012-06-13 00:47:42
title: On Tranquility
layout: post
---

> Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but a desire fulfilled is a tree of life. 
#### —Prov. 13:12

> In living close to nature, one discovers that happiness does not consist in maximizing pleasure. It consists in tranquility. Once you have enjoyed tranquility long enough, you acquire actually an aversion to the thought of any very strong pleasure—excessive pleasure would disrupt your tranquility. 
#### —Part 4, "An Interview With Ted" (Theodore J. Kaczynski)

### Found in the woods
Ted Kaczynski made bombs. He has done many other things, but it is making bombs that has made him infamous. Indeed, were it not for the concession by the FBI allowing the so-called "Unabomber Manifesto" to be published, he might have eluded the authorities for even longer than 17 years. As it happened, his brother David recognized Ted as the author of "Industrial Society and its Future" when it was published in the Washington Post in mid-September 1995, and Kaczynski was arrested in early April the following year.

He was arrested where he had lived since 1971, in his small wooden home in rural Montana. Kaczynski had never been fond of modern ways of living, and had already planned on living in the wilderness when he accepted a job at UC Berkeley to teach math in 1967. He taught for two years to save up some money, and then headed off to opt out of a lifestyle he found not only devoid of personal satisfaction, but also a terrible threat to both human dignity and the planet's well-being.

As remarked by David Skrbina—a professor of philosophy at the University of Michigan-Dearborn who has maintained a long-term correspondence with Kaczynski since his imprisonment—we might never have heard from Ted Kaczynski again. But the tranquility he had found was imperfect.

> In one of his letters to me, he recounts how both recreationists and the Forest Service continually pressed in on him—to the point where a peaceful life was no longer possible. This invasion constituted a kind of war, and Kaczynski began to defend himself. (Introduction, Technological Slavery, 2010)

It is pointless to defend Kaczynski's actions as reasonable within our society's expectations, which takes as a given that violence is not an appropriate response to being inconvenienced, whether this takes the form of being cut off in traffic or being pestered by the Forest Service. But to dismiss Kaczynski as ill or illogical simply because he chose to commit violent acts is misguided. Not only are Kaczynski's arguments rational and lucidly expressed, they are also increasingly relevant to our contemporary predicament. As Skrbina points out, Kaczynski is not alone in raising the alarm about the perils of our increasingly reliance on—[and possible elimination by](http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/8.04/joy.html)—the advance of technology.

Personally, I find Kaczynski's writings incredibly interesting, even fascinating. I suspect he is right that there are no fixes to the technological system that can remedy the problems it has created. I am a pessimist in this regard—I think we will probably keep on going like this until something truly terrible happens. As the saying goes, no one changes until the pain of changing is less than the pain of staying the same.

My mother finds it difficult to understand why I am willing to credit Kaczynski's ideas. Perhaps she believes that credible insight into life can only come from someone who shares one's values. This is an understandable position, but it has never  been my own. Indeed, our society seems content to take—or to claim to take—its main principles from a book written in a time and place with a values system so radically different from our own that it strains credulity. Yes, I mean the Bible.

That said, certainly I do not advocate making bombs. I don't even have a desire to go live off the grid, let alone any passion for a revolutionary movement to provoke the demise of the technological system. (Heck, I read _Technological Slavery_ on my Kindle, and now I'm blogging about it.) But I nonetheless relate to Kaczynski's theories regarding the human need for autonomy, for meaningful work, and for a daily closeness to the natural world. He continues in that interview:

> [O]ne learns that boredom is a disease of civilization. [...] Boredom is almost nonexistent once you've become adapted to life in the woods. If you don't have any work that needs to be done, you can sit for hours at a time just doing nothing, just listening to the birds or the wind or the silence, watching the shadows move as the sun travels, or simply looking at familiar objects. And you don't get bored. You're just at peace.

When I enjoy my morning listening only to the birds, or take time in the afternoon to stare at the backyard, or let the sound of rain on the roof put me to sleep, I, too, feel that peace, the peace of just being, merely observing and absorbing the pleasantness of one's surroundings. Should we not be moved by these words because the Unabomber wrote them? I say we should still be moved. Indeed, the fact that Kaczynski's tranquil withdrawal gave way to acts of terrorist provocation makes his insight into the possibilities of a peaceful existence all the more poignant.

### The nature of things
Stephen Greenblatt is an academic, but his latest book, _The Swerve: How the World Became Modern_, is a foray into the genre of popular non-fiction. And it is a pure delight. The book relates the fortunes of one ancient text, the Latin poet Lucretius's _De rerum natura_, and the adventures of one Renaissance man, the Italian book-hunter Poggio Bracciolini.  who rediscovered Lucretius's poem in a monastery library and launched its subversive, Epicurean ideas into fifteenth-century Europe, and so into the modern world.

While I happen to have, like the author, a personal connection to Lucretius's poem, [On the Nature of Things](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/De_rerum_natura) is not a well-known text outside the ranks of classical scholarship. Written in the first century B.C.E, the book-length verse-form composition describes Epicurean philosophy to a Roman audience, and includes ideas about physics, astronomy, biology, and anthropology.

First among the tenets of Epicureanism is the principle of atomism, which holds that all that exists is a combination of irreducibly tiny particles in various combinations, interacting within the void. While this materialist emphasis means that the soul is not immortal, the determinism such materialism implies is not absolute—the random "swerve" of atoms accounts for chance events and forms the basis of free will.

The notion of the "swerve" alleviates what Epicurus considered the main source of misery in human life—fear of the wrath or caprice of the gods. Once one understands that the universe operates according to principles of physics rather than according to the wiles of all-powerful deities, one is free from such dread, whether in this life or after death. While Lucretius did not deny the existence of the Roman deities, he maintained that they had no involvement in human affairs. Accordingly, the proper attitude toward human life—so counseled Epicurus—was therefore not one of fear and worry, but one of enjoyment and contentment.

I have purposely avoided the use of the term pleasure in the above description of Epicurean philosophy, despite the fact that it is undoubtedly the most common principle generally associated therewith. One of the most fascinating parts of _The Swerve_ is Greenblatt's explanation of how Epicurean ideas about contentment in mortal existence were perceived as a scandalous threat.

> A philosophical claim that life's ultimate goal is pleasure—even if that pleasure was defined in the most restrained and responsible terms—was a scandal, both for pagans and for their adversaries, the Jews and later the Christians. Pleasure as the highest good? What about worshipping the gods and ancestors? Serving the family, the city, and the state? Scrupulously observing the laws and commandments? Pursuing virtue or a vision of the divine? These competing claims inevitably entailed forms of ascetic self-denial, self-sacrifice, even self-loathing. None was compatible with the pursuit of pleasure as the highest good. (78)

In the following chapter, Greenblatt describes how, once Christianity had established itself as the state religion, it went about discrediting and then eliminating Epicurean philosophy.

> What had to be undertaken was was the difficult project of making what appeared simply sane and natural—the ordinary impulses of all sentient creatures—seem like the enemy of the truth. [...] Early Christians, brooding on the sufferings of the Savoir, the sinfulness of mankind, and the anger of a just Father, found the attempt to cultivate pleasure manifestly absurd and dangerous. [...] The most ardent early believers in this doctrine... were determined to make the pain to which all humankind was condemned their active choice. (102, 104-105)

Greenblatt then provides a fascinating account of routine corporeal punishments in early monasteries and convents, and finally the incorporation of self-inflicted pain into mainstream Church practice.

> The insistance that punishment be actively embraced by the victims—literalized in the kissing of the rod—marked a deliberate Christian trampling on the Epicurean credo of pursuing pleasure and avoiding pain. After all, the experience of pain was not only punishment; it was a form of pious emulation. Christian hermits, brooding on the sufferings of the Savior, mortified their flesh, in order to experience in their own bodies the torments that Jesus had to undergo. Though these acts of self-scourging began to be reported in late antiquity... it was not until the eleventh century that a monastic reformer, the Italian Benedictine Peter Damian, established voluntary self-flagellation as a central ascetic practice acceptable to the Church. It had taken a thousand years to win the struggle and secure the triumph of pain seeking. (106-107)

As what was once a "radical counterculture" (108) spread into the mainstream, a defense of pleasure became impossible. It wasn't, of course, that pleasure-seeking activity ceased; it was simply that it became "philosophically indefensible," such that "virtually no one in moral authority, no one with a public voice, dared speak up to justify any of it" (109). To be Christian was to insist—regardless of what one actually did—on the goodness of abnegation. "Epicurus was dead and buried, almost all of his works destroyed. And after St. Jerome in the fourth century briefly noted that Lucretius had committed suicide, there were no attacks on Epicurus's great Roman disciple. He was forgotten" (109).

Epicurus may no longer be technically forgotten, but we seem nonetheless equally timid, even naive, when it comes to our attempts at formulating a non-threatening role for self-regulation based on the principle of the avoidance of pain. Two columnists in the _New York Times_ have recently considered the relationship between pleasure and morality. Last week, Maureen O'Dowd asked [Is Pleasure A Sin?](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/06/opinion/dowd-is-pleasure-a-sin.html), a question that makes sense only under the long shadow of the Catholic Church, which has, as we know, treated it as such for the last 2000 years.  Feminist liberal that she is, O'Dowd pulls out the traditional rants against Vatican: it is out of touch, backward-looking, and bent on the subjugation of women. On that final point, O'Dowd gripes about the Vatican's recent censure of the 2006 book _Just Love: a Framework for Christian Sexual Ethics_, authored by Sister Margaret Farley, a professor emeritus at Yale's Divinity School and, as her title implies, a nun.

> This latest ignoble fight with a noble nun adds to the picture of a Catholic Church in a permanent defensive crouch, steeped in Borgia-like corruption and sexual scandals, lashing out at anyone who notes the obvious: They have lost track of right and wrong.

_Lost_ track? But the Church never gave any ground when it came to endorsing pleasure! O'Dowd falls, unthinkingly it seems, into the erroneous notion that it is modernity that has given people the courage to conceive as pleasure as other than sin, when this is simply not so. Similarly, she seems to think it is modern social expectations, such as those regarding the status of women, that make the Vatican's dogma seem retrograde. But this, too, is untrue. While it might appear that the Church plays favorites with its dogmatic demands, this is only because the original flavor of its equal-opportunity pain-seeking philosophy has been diluted over time. In short, we have less self-flagellation and more discussion of contraception. But the so-called "war on women" is at bottom simply more of the same old thing the Church threw against men, women, and children alike from the earliest times: Christ versus Epicurus, pain versus pleasure, morality versus sin.

David Brooks, in his column [The Moral Diet](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/08/opinion/brooks-the-moral-diet.html) comes straight out and observes that, thanks to the dominance of the Christian world view, "[f]or the past several centuries, most Westerners would have identified themselves fundamentally as Depraved Sinners. In this construct, sin is something you fight like a recurring cancer — part of a daily battle against evil." Now, he argues, people are more likely to operate under the "Good Person Construct," meaning we gauge our conduct according to an overall standard that, while drawing a firm line against clearly egregious acts, allows for the commission of peccadilloes with no loss of self-esteem.

> In this construct moral life is more like dieting: I give myself permission to have a few cookies because I had salads for lunch and dinner. I give myself permission to cheat a little because, when I look at my overall life, I see that I'm still a good person.

Brooks, character-focused conservative that he is, advises us to "shoot for rectitude" rather than goodness, as the latter is "too vague and forgiving." Too relative, he means: it is too easy to think that what you think is good _is_ actually good. "We're mostly unqualified to judge our own moral performances, so attach yourself to some exterior or social standards." But even with that caveat, Brooks ends the column wondering if this strategy is not in fact "settling for mediocrity."

Again, this is nothing less than a rehash of the old line that associates autonomy and pleasure-seeking with sin—as if the only choices we have are between self-flagellation (as Depraved Sinners) and anarchy (as Epicureans). "Next time you feel tempted by something, recite the Ten Commandments," one paragraph begins. Really? Am I reading this in 2012, in of all places the _New York Times_? Is this the state of our public discourse about morality? I hardly know whether to laugh or cry.

### Martians on Earth
> It is thanks to Ray Bradbury that I understand this world I grew into for what it is: a dystopian future. And it is thanks to him that we know how to conduct ourselves in such a world: arm yourself with books. Assassinate your television. Go for walks, and talk with your neighbors. Cherish beauty; defend it with your life. Become a Martian. —Tim Kreider, [Uncle Ray's Dystopia](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/08/opinion/uncle-rays-dystopia.html)

This week also marked the passing of Ray Bradbury, the celebrated writer of popular science fiction. The outpouring of remembrance of his life and literary contributions again reminds us that we rather enjoy dystopic imaginations of our future world. Indeed, one need look no further than the recent _Hunger Games_ phenomenon.

Bradbury was a sort of Luddite—he never learned to drive, and for a long time he didn't fly. Yet it seems he eschewed technology not out of a deep-seated hostility, but rather for reasons of both indifference and of aesthetic preference. On the first count, he was confident that his pen and paper could [out-create a computer](http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/6.10/bradbury.html), and on the second, he simply didn't like things that were [ugly, loud, or vulgar](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/08/opinion/uncle-rays-dystopia.html?_r=1). Perhaps he could be described as a sort of minimalist, someone devoted to the aesthetics of unnecessary improvements, from airplanes to higher ed. Indeed, he credited the library for giving him a career as a writer that [no college degree could have](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/07/books/ray-bradbury-popularizer-of-science-fiction-dies-at-91.html?pagewanted=1".

His suspicions regarding technology, and the miserable world he predicted it would lead to, seem to have captured his imagination without depleting a sense of hope. Bradbury's visions were dsytopic, but his tendencies were anything but nihilist and reclusive; he kept writing till the end, and he granted numerous interviews and appearances. It was as if he managed to somehow contain his foreboding within his art and simultaneously manage a regular existence of work, marriage, and family.

It is likely for this reason that we remember Bradbury with fondness; though his ideas are dark, even radical, his delivery of them was not just palatable but engrossing, delightful. Yet as Kreider reminds us, we shouldn't let the amusing, sentimental Bradbury distract us from the dire, exhortatory one, the man who was issuing nothing less than a call to arms. That these arms are books not bombs, and that the victims are televisions not technophiles—this should not obscure the importance of the necessary struggle for autonomy, dignity, and, most important of all, tranquility.
