---
date: 2012-11-06 23:40:16
title: On Election Day
---

> But I say to you, Do not swear at all, either by heaven, for it is the throne of God, or by the earth, for it is his footstool, or by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. And do not swear by your head, for you cannot make one hair white or black. Let your word be 'Yes, yes' or 'No, no'; anything more than this comes from the evil one. —Matt. 5.35-37</p>

### Resigned
I began this post yesterday, long before Obama was projected to win reelection. In the different world that yesterday now seems to me, I gave a few hours to the campaign — a token effort, in large respect — simply to preserve the right to kvetch for the next four years if things didn't go our way.

This fall has been a busy one for me; I'm in the midst of an unusual, even experimental transition toward putting writing at the center of my life. I've been working part-time for a while now, and recently I just picked up my third part-time position, motivated by a rare opportunity to receive (after 3 months of work) benefits, including health insurance. Though I'll be working in retail rather than in the education sphere, I am much more enthused by the possibility of reasonably-priced health care than I am convinced by the possibilities of remaining (however tenuously) in my "field".

<!--more-->

As the above graphic indicates, I've been keeping my eyes peeled for quite a while now. Yesterday, I decided it was time to avert my eyes for a while; nor will I renew my membership in the Modern Language Association, the professional organization for professors and scholars in English and foreign languages and literature. After 10 years, I've proven to myself that while I would have gladly accepted — and probably would have enjoyed, and thrived at — a full-time position as a professor, I cannot bring myself to pursue the profession with the single-mindedness the current job market demands. Call me naive, but I got my Ph.D. because I thought it would lead rather naturally to a job for which by temperament and training I was suited. It turns out that the degree resembled the kind of parking permits sold by the University where I got it — a license to hunt, but not a guaranteed space.

### Jobs, Jobs, Jobs
Much of the discussion this election — if we can characterize the relentless stream of negative ads as a discussion — has been about which party has the better plan to generate jobs, which in a bad economy becomes a synonym for the starry-eyed, gilded American concept of _opportunity_. Americans, arguably, are unique in their obsession with the virtue of hard work; perhaps it is the importance of pioneering in the creation of the country that has given us this instinctive association between deservingness and willingness to work. Never mind that Romney's income is certainly not commensurate with his mental efforts or talents; the sheer amount of his wealth alone seems to induce a magical thinking according to which he believes that he possesses some innate ability to ease the nation's employment woes. And even with Obama's (projected) reelection, a sizable bunch of people have voted for a ticket obsessed with the idea that success is a correlate of one's efforts, and for that reason, any sort of social safety net is a handout for slackers.

Four years ago, when Virginia went blue in a presidential election for the first time in over a generation, a Republican crony named Virgil Goode lost his cushy seat in the House of Representatives. Although the freshman Democrat who rode Obama's coattails to Washington, Tom Perriello, could not hang on to his seat in the midterm elections, Goode was gone for good — almost. His name appeared on today's ballot in 26 states as the presidential candidate for the Constitution Party. A central plank of Goode's platform is to restrict legal immigration until unemployment falls below 5%, an idea that makes me chuckle when I think of the bias in my own profession toward native Italian speakers. Arguably, I could benefit from Goode's proposal, but — the tinge of racism/xenophobia aside — I know better than to fall for the simplemindedness of such a jaded theory of prosperity. To believe that in order to create prosperity you need to restrict the competition is to succumb to no less a magical type of thinking than Mitt Romney's conviction in his ability to "restore" America: both want to flip a switch and change outcomes.

I will be the first to admit that I didn't 'play the game' of academia as heartily as I could have; I only understood that it _was_ a game well into the late innings. But I also know that so much of life is a fielder's choice — not every advancement or setback is a referendum on your qualifications or performance.

### Canvassed
As part of my two-hour chilly stroll though a part of my voting precinct, I visited a public housing development. It was located (obviously) within walking distance from my house, and although I drive the nearby thoroughfare regularly, I'd never seen it up close. Quite honestly, I don't think I even knew it was there.

As a confirmed liberal, I absolutely see the value of providing subsidized housing for those who cannot, for whatever reason, earn enough to afford adequate housing at market rates. There is certainly an argument to be made that such assistance will take away an incentive for self-advancement; however, given that, as Jesus said, "the poor you will always have with you," (Matt. 26:11) it is arguably more farsighted (not to mention more compassionate) to not let self-reliance be the sole safeguard between our fellow citizens and slumlords.

I admit to a feeling of separation; there are surely two Americas, or perhaps many Americas, divided along the invisibile lines of ideology and the far more visible ones of income. But separation is not systematic; it is idiosyncratic. On a tucked-away street I'd never been down, I found a beautifully updated house, complete with spiffy front garden and stained glass windows, right next to the most wretchedly run-down property. At this latter house, a woman who hadn't been reached on the first canvas pass opened the door, and assured me that not only were she and her husband voting for Obama, another person who had canvassed was picking them up and taking them to the polls. It was one of just a handful of contacts I'd made in my two hours, and there was of course no way to know if any of them would make a difference. But of course I didn't agree to volunteer with the expectation of making a difference with such a minimal time commitment. I did it for reasons that can only be described as idiosyncratic.

My initial plan was to vote this morning, but in the end I was too concerned that the pre-work rush would prevent me from showing up for my final training shift at my new job. So I walked up to the polling place around 2pm or so, and ended up standing around outside the school a bit as I wrapped up a phone conversation I was having with my dad. While we chatted, I saw my next-door neighbors exit the polling place and head homeward. I stepped out to the sidewalk to greet them; we greeted each other warmly, and, as if in a subconscious throwback to an earlier point in the century, we shook hands.

My neighbors, who live in a modest ranch house nearly identical to mine, are wonderful folks; the wife is vivacious and sweet, and her husband has generously helped me with several yard projects. The fact that they are immigrants from El Salvador does not render them, in my mind, any less American than myself. This is as it should be, but it may not be an attitude that comes naturally to everyone. And while one could chalk up my attitude  to a decidedly liberal upbringing in a liberal enclave of an already-liberal state, I am more inclined, at this point in my life, to account for it by a personal awareness of the sheer unpredictability of life experience. My family has given me every possible advantage in life: unconditional love, unparalleled education, financial security. And yet life is nonetheless often challenging, and regularly unfair. Personally, I don't think being an American is solely about any of the buzz words so fetishized by presidential campaigns: success, opportunity, or hard work. I think it's about plain random luck, and sheer chance: the luck to be born on our soil, the chance that one takes in leaving one's birth nation for foreign shores. To bend an old saying toward our point: America is what happened while a bunch of old white men were busy making other plans.

Go Obama!
