---
date: 2013-03-28 22:08:08
title: On Immorality
layout: post
---

> Oscar Wilde and Alfred Taylor, the crime of which you have been convicted is so bad that one has to put stern restraint upon one's self to prevent one's self from describing, in language which I would rather not use, the sentiments which must rise in the breast of every man of honor who has heard the details of these two horrible trials.  That the jury has arrived at a correct verdict in this case I cannot persuade myself to entertain a shadow of a doubt... 

> It is no use for me to address you.  People who can do these things must be dead to all sense of shame, and one cannot hope to produce any effect upon them.  It is the worst case I have ever tried.  That you, Taylor, kept a kind of male brothel it is impossible to doubt.  And that you, Wilde, have been the center of a circle of extensive corruption of the most hideous kind among young men, it is equally impossible to doubt.

> I shall, under the circumstances, be expected to pass the severest sentence that the law allows.  In my judgment it it totally inadequate for a case such as this.  The sentence of the Court is that each of you be imprisoned and kept to hard labor for two years. 
#### —[sentence of Justice Wills](ttp://law2.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/wilde/sentence.html) against Oscar Wilde and Alfred Taylor after a jury verdict of guilty on the charge of "gross indecencies" (London, 1895)

> **CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS**: So 84 Senators—it's the same question I asked before; 84 Senators based their vote [for DOMA] on moral disapproval of gay people?

> **MS. KAPLAN**: No, I think—I think what is true, Mr. Chief Justice, is that times can blind, and that back in 1996 people did not have the understanding that they have today, that there is no distinction, there is no constitutionally permissible distinction---

> **CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS**: Well, does that mean—times can blind. Does that mean they did not base their votes on moral disapproval?

> **MS. KAPLAN**: No; some clearly did. I think it was based on an understanding that gay—an incorrect understanding that gay couples were fundamentally different than straight couples, an understanding that I don't think exists today and that's the sense I'm using that times can blind. I think there was—we all can understand that people have moved on this, and now understand that there is no such distinction. So I'm not saying it was animus or bigotry, I think it was based on a misunderstanding on gay people and their—

> **JUSTICE SCALIA**: Why—why are you so confident in that—in that judgment? How many—how many States permit gay—gay couples to marry?

> **MS. KAPLAN**: Today? 9, Your Honor.

> **JUSTICE SCALIA**: 9. And—and so there has been this sea change between now and 1996.

> **MS. KAPLAN**: I think with respect to the understanding of gay people and their relationships there has been a sea change, Your Honor. —Oral arguments in [_United States v. Windsor_](http://www.scotusblog.com/case-files/cases/windsor-v-united-states-2/?wpmp_switcher=desktop) (Docket No. 12-137), March 27, 2013. Ms. Roberta Kaplan argued on behalf of the respondent, Edith Windsor.

### Skim-milk morality
Eternal youth, though not the malevolent kind bestowed on Wilde's poor Dorian Gray, would have been an interesting perspective from which to have witnessed the sea change that has occurred in the West over the last century in regard to the personal, moral, social, and legal understandings of same-sex relations and relationships. For it is the young, the surveys consistently say, that are responsible for taking in stride what many of their most liberal-minded elders initially found it hard to stomach. What would it feel like, I wonder, for someone who magically remained an immortal member of the latest generation, to feel his or her moral attitudes evolve with the times, despite the memories of convictions no longer remembered or felt by others? Would it feel strange and destabilizing to see the rate at which human norms alter and shift, or would it feel wonderfully refreshing, an inner renewal to complement the permanence of physical youth? Would our immortal witness become cynical in the face of persistent change, or would she marvel at such evolutions as a crucial hallmark of the human spirit?

Perhaps not coincidentally, these two hypothetical reactions of our fantastic observer somewhat align with conservative and liberal political attitudes. Conservatives believe that what is once a positive value is always so, and it must upset them that, simply by standing still, they appear move from the mainstream to the rocky shoals of bigotry. Liberals, on the other hand, are happy to embrace today the folks they consigned to the DSM-IV a generation ago, considering it a point of pride that today they, and their children, simply know better than to fear and denigrate those they mistakenly believed to be fundamentally different.

That _mistakenly_ is a key point, for Ms. Kaplan is surely right that is not an acceptance (in the sense of mere tolerance, where what is tolerated is still viewed as something radically different) that has motivated such a sea change in American opinion, but rather the opposite, namely, a new appreciation of homosexuality that deemphasizes difference. Many Americans feel, and younger ones in particular, that gender doesn't matter that much in the construction of a committed relationship: whatever the gender composition of the couple, the means and ends of that togetherness are felt to be the same. Americans have therefore not moved toward the concept of homosexuality so much as gays and lesbians, as people, have moved toward Americans. And Americans, despite the pervasiveness of divorce and the skyrocketing rise in unmarried cohabitation and single motherhood, really get a kick out of celebrating and promoting marriage: in a kind of avant-la-Facebook way, we _like_ it.

At the time of Stonewall, when the central issue facing the gay community was the right to congregate without being harassed, beaten, and arrested, the gap between that so-called "lifestyle" and the rest of America seemed insurmountable. (Not to mention the fact that, in the 1950s, [homosexuality was treated as the equivalent of sexual predation of men against teenage boys](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=37kHRMSdsj4) When someone doesn't want the same things that you do, it is entirely too easy to dismiss them as alien or other or perverse or what have you. I'm not saying, of course, that this reaction is justified or justified. But it is certainly real, and it is most certainly the go-to reaction by a social majority seeking to buttress and perpetuate its own practices and institutions.

The moment, however, that the gay pride movement matured to the point where that pride could be expressed not only as pride-in-difference, but as a fundamental human solidarity, the sea change began. If you want what I want—namely, to be free to love, to marry, to raise children—well, then you cannot be that different from me. And if you are not so different, well, I cannot find it in my heart and mind to loathe you. Moral feeling, pardon my saying so, is like orgasm: you either arrive at it or you don't.

This visceral aspect of moral objection is perhaps what troubles Antonin Scalia, who has the unfortunate habit of equating the moral admission of same-sex relationships with the collapse of moral mechanics altogether. At a speech given at Princeton, when asked by a student why he consistently equates laws against sodomy with those banning bestiality and murder, [Scalia replied](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/compost/wp/2012/12/11/scalia-reductios-himself-ad-absurdum-on-murder-and-homosexuality/): "If we cannot have moral feelings against homosexuality, can we have it against murder? Can we have it against other things?" For most of us, this _reductio ad absurdum_ hypothetical does not pose a problem, but Scalia clearly feels that he is being asked to override his own internal sense of what is moral on behalf of a public consensus that has begun to move on without him. Understandably, this puts him in a destabilized position that is rather unenviable. It must be tough to wake up on the highest court in the land and realize that public opinion is passing you by. Irrelevance is the harshest blow of social evolution.

### Blinded by the Right
Speaking of irrelevance, let's talk about the GOP. While individuals are free to stick in the mud as long as they please—and of course, let's not pretend that the issue is truly settled, with 49% of Americans in favor of gay marriage and 44% against—a political party holds one thing more dear than its principles: winning. Given which way the wind is blowing, though, it stands to reason that if the Republicans would benefit from conceding a loss in the culture wars, and becoming again the party of the Big Tent.

First of all, given that people who tend to be conservative on social issues are also so on economic ones, the Republicans aren't likely to alienate their base (as the odd expression goes) if they drop the litmus test of being anti-choice and anti-gay, because those voters aren't likely going to suddenly see the Democratic Party as more in line with their views. Whether or not those folks would just stay at home, or vote for a third party, is hard to predict, but at the very least, the Republicans could, in the next primary season, not spend the entire time competing to say the newest, stupidest thing in their eagerness to get to the right of one another on these fronts.

The Republicans seem to have forgotten the best play in their own playbook: redefine yourself to win, the way Nixon was advised to do in bringing an anti-abortion stance into the platform for the first time in the 1972. While state legislatures seem obsessed with passing new laws restricting abortion, clearly on a national level, the issue doesn't have the kind of pull it once did. Therefore, just drop it. The Party can't afford to share the view of [Eric Teetsel, the executive director of the Manhattan Declaration](http://www.npr.org/2013/03/24/175201923/millennials-and-same-sex-marriage-a-waning-divide), a conservative activist group, who balks at a shift on cultural issues, specifically gay marriage, as unprincipled. "You don't hear us talking about backing away from other core principles that aren't necessarily popular... To change your principles in order to win voters over is the kind of thing that we view negatively in American politics." Teetsel may not be alone in this viewpoint, but as a self-described Christian first, conservative second, and Republican way down the list, he's not the person the Republicans can—or should want to!—rely on to win them back the White House, because there are not enough people like him to carry the day for the GOP. There is a certain irony to the idea that the Republicans have gone from the party of easy, general appeal (Reagan, anyone?) to that of hard-sell principles; as I recall from my childhood, that used to be the short straw drawn, election after election, by the Democrats.

In the [RNC post-mortem](http://tpmdc.talkingpointsmemo.com/2013/03/6-big-takeaways-from-the-rncs-incredible-election-autopsy.php?ref=fpb) on the failures of the 2012 campaign, several of the recommendations warn precisely against the attitudes here espoused by Teetsel. In addition to stating specifically that the party must begin to move to the left on gay rights issues, it also declares that the party is indeed at risk for what is known as [epistemic closure](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/28/books/28conserv.html), meaning, it resists all dissenting voices to the point where it is successful in articulating its ideas only to those who already share them. (Surely this helps to explain the ridiculous comments about rape that fell out of the mouths of one Republican after another last year.)

> The Republican Party needs to stop talking to itself... We have become expert in how to provide ideological reinforcement to like-minded people, but devastatingly we have lost the ability to be persuasive with, or welcoming to, those who do not agree with us on every issue. Instead of driving around in circles on an ideological cul-de-sac, we need a Party whose brand of conservatism invites and inspires new people to visit us.

This is pragmatic advice, and the GOP would be well to take it. Indeed, it would be downright _groundbreaking_ were we to have a national election in which the wedge issues of abortion, gay-rights, and illegal immigration were somehow tabled. It could turn into a legitimate and wonderful free-for-all, where, for staters, pro-choice women would have the option to vote their minds and checkbooks rather than just their uteruses. I can't help but think that this would function to actually _improve_ the Democratic Party as well, given that they would no longer be able to take certain constituencies for granted. But I digress...

### Boy in a Bubble
The discomfort that Justice Scalia transmutes into provocation (as only he can) points directly to the issue that interests me in this post, namely, what happens in a cultural context when one person's principle starts to become someone else's bigotry. Those who arrive at the opposition to gay marriage from a religious point of view perhaps have no choice but to maintain their opposition, although it is unlikely that, if gay marriage is gradually made legal, state by state, that it will lodge itself in the public craw the way abortion has. Among those simply unenthused, the flow of the new status quo will likely carry them along; indeed, judging from the festival-like atmosphere outside the courthouse, where many posters urged for marriage equality on the tongue-in-cheek basis that gays and lesbians should have the opportunity to be as miserably married as straight couples, the very notion of gay rights now includes supporting a shared vision of contemporary American life (à la [Kindle commercial](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S-7IA54-tmE) This is what Ms. Kaplan is talking about when she speaks about the difference between 1996 and now. Add to it the smiling interracial couples that hold signs reminding onlookers that, not so long ago, they wouldn't have been allowed to marry, and you come away with a sense that allowing people to love whom they choose is a net gain to society.

As a constitutional matter, things are of course not that simple. Scalia, having made a career of locking himself in a Constitutional time warp, arrives at his conviction that states can legislate morality based on the notion that the founding document doesn't make it unconstitutional to do so. Here is an excerpt from Tuesday's oral argument in [_Hollingsworth v. Perry_](http://www.scotusblog.com/case-files/cases/hollingsworth-v-perry/?wpmp_switcher=desktop):

> **JUSTICE SCALIA**: The California Supreme Court decides what the law is. That's what we decide, right? We don't prescribe law for the future. We—we decide what the law is. I'm curious, when—when did—when did it become unconstitutional to exclude homosexual couples from marriage? 1791? 1868, when the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted? Sometimes—some time after [Baker](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baker_v._Nelson), where we said it didn't even raise a substantial Federal question? When—when—when did the law become this?

> **MR. OLSON**: When—may I answer this in the form of a rhetorical question? When did it become unconstitutional to prohibit interracial marriages?  When did it become unconstitutional to assign children to separate schools.

> **JUSTICE SCALIA**: It's an easy question, I think, for that one. At—at the time that the Equal Protection Clause was adopted. That's absolutely true. But don't give me a question to my question. _[Laughter.]_ When do you think it became  unconstitutional? Has it always been unconstitutional?</blockquote>
This is a good question, and certainly the difficulties that Theodore Olson (speaking for the Respondents) has in providing a good answer point to the can of worms that an equal protection argument would open, especially in the context of _Hollingsworth_, which deals, in theory, solely with California's Proposition 8. In the cases of interracial marriages and school segregation, when they were ruled unconstitutional, all states had to comply with those rulings. No matter what you feel about the legitimacy of marriage equality, a national ruling that would compel all 50 states to legalize gay marriage is likely to create a huge public-opinion backlash. The possibility of such an outcome is arguably even greater  in the Windsor case, where the equal protection argument is more relevant: if the Court rules that state-sanctioned same-sex marriages must be recognized for the purpose of federal benefits, can it stop short of maintaining that all states <em>must</em> recognize such marriages—even when it is agreed upon by all sides that it is the states that are in charge of marriage law?

Scalia's question of when something became unconstitutional is both misleading and also incredibly telling. I believe that it is indeed true that the right for gays and lesbians to enter into the civil contracts known as marriage _is_ protected by the Equal Protection Clause, and thus, technically speaking, laws that restrict gays and lesbians from marrying became unconstitutional when the 14th Amendment was added to the Constitution. Of course, this fact of timing does not tell us anything about when the Court will _recognize_ this right as having always existed. When Scalia says that answering the question of when school segregation or interracial marriage became unconstitutional is easy, what he is really saying is that one easily recognizes, in 2013, that these rights are found within the Equal Protection Clause. And so it should be easy, as soon we will mark fifty years since both _Loving_ was decided, and sixty since _Brown_—not to mention the approaching sesquicentennial of the Fourteenth Amendement itself in 2018. Scalia's skepticism is evident when he implies to Ms. Kaplan that perhaps 9 states doesn't constitute a true sea change, but even his skepticism outlines the parameters within which the nation will grown toward greater acceptance, both cultural and legal, of gay marriage.

In the unanimous decision in _Loving_, Chief Justice Earl Warren wrote the following:

> Marriage is one of the "basic civil rights of man," fundamental to our very existence and survival.... To deny this fundamental freedom on so unsupportable a basis as the racial classifications embodied in these statutes, classifications so directly subversive of the principle of equality at the heart of the Fourteenth Amendment, is surely to deprive all the State's citizens of liberty without due process of law.

Maybe the country is not ready to hear the phrase "gender-based sexual preference" in place of "racial classifications". One day, however, it will be. Times blind, but they also change.
