---
date: 2017-03-23 17:34:24
title: Trolls vs. Makers
layout: post
---

> "Illiberalism" is the permanent fact of life. Moments of social peace and coexistence, however troubled and imperfect, are the brief miracle that needs explaining, and protecting. In this way, \[Joel\] Mokyr's vision of a revolution made by hand retrieves the best side of the Enlightenment, and Voltaire as he really was. An easily overlooked aspect of Voltaire's thought was the priority it gave, especially in later life, to practice. Watchmaking, vegetable growing, star charting: the great Enlightenment thinker turned decisively away from abstraction as he aged. The argument of _Candide_ is neither that the world gets better nor that it's all for naught; it's that happiness is where you find it, and you find it first by making it yourself. [...] Getting out to make good things happen beats sitting down and thinking big things up.
#### —[The Illiberal Imagination](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/03/20/are-liberals-on-the-wrong-side-of-history) 

### Tiratisu
A long time ago, when I lived in Italy for the first time, I struck up an improbable friendship with an older lady, who was the mother of an Italian woman my mother knew through work (in San Francisco). She introduced me to this cafeteria-style restaurant (a _mensa_, in Italian) that served Zen cuisine—inexpensive, healthful (vegan), and aspirational: their tofu-based tiramisu was called called, instead, tiraTIsu, which was the first time that I understood that the word for the famous dessert actually _meant_ something: it means'pick me up', and the Zen mensa's alternative was an appropriate imperative: pick _yourself_ up!

Living in a foreign country, learning and/or perfecting another language has a very noticeable bootstrapping aspect to it: encounters whose ease you take for granted at home become mini-ordeals once you realize you don't know how to say, for instance, the word for towel (_asciugamano_, which literally means 'hand dryer'). This process of language-learning and cultural exchange has, for me, a strong association with another form of making: do-it-yourself (deliciously rendered in Italian as _fai-da-te_). If I had to guess, this is probably because, within a month or so of moving to Bologna, I had managed to buy a shower rod _and_ have one of neighbors who had a workshop in the cortile in our apartment building appropriately shorten it so that it could be installed. I was elated, but, to be honest, I think mostly I used pantomime.

But that is the best part, I think, about do-it-yourself: the discovery that comes from starting out not knowing what the heck you are doing. Obviously, if power tools are involved, you want to know _a little bit_ about what you are up to. But in many tasks (gardening, painting, basic carpentry), there is plenty of room for the trial-and-error process that is the only way humans have ever mastered anything.

### To code or not to code, is that the question?
Consumer culture and global manufacturing have shifted the focus of of 'making' outside the household; this is a rather radical, and possibly under-appreciated, change. For me personally, the early primacy of self-reliance (in the form of household production) is one of the most interesting observations that John Taylor Gatto makes in his no-holds-barred indictment of compulsory public education in America, [Weapons of Mass Instruction: A Schoolteacher's Journey Through the Dark World of Compulsory Schooling](https://www.amazon.com/Weapons-Mass-Instruction-Schoolteachers-Compulsory/dp/0865716692)

> Take the matter of personal _production_ as opposed to _consumption_; production of goods, values, ideas, and marching orders. Colonial and early federal America held the ideal of self-sufficiency as the very pinnacle of achievement. The ideal household aimed to produce its own food, clothing, shelter, entertainment, transportation, medical care, education, child care, and social security. A large fraction of the population never got there, but as a City on the Hill to strive for it was an ennobling vision which some families, especially on the frontier, succeeding in making happen. It was this idea of being personally empowered, in contrast to the servile states of Europe and Asia, which acted as a magnet for the world's peoples—not the prospect of two cars, a house in the suburbs, and the latest computer junk. (44)

The main thing most of us 'make' these days is 'a living'—if we can even manage that. To the extent that we pursue other things, we are encouraged to pursue them as 'hobbies', thus redirecting that energy once again into the consumer economy. So while such making may give us pleasure, it generally does not lead to a substantial redefinition of our relationship to work. A notable exception to this might be the tech field, which, because of the breath and popularity of open-source code and ideas, has the potential to actually blur the old line between consuming and production. You really can—assuming you have the time and access to adequate instructional materials—make something from nothing (and often _for_ next-to-nothing, in terms of cold hard cash) on the Internet. Movements, memes, and money-making schemes all circle the globe at the speed of light.

This is all true, but the old struggles and old equalities have not gone away: indeed, they are merely being repeated and replayed in the tech sector. The prestige of many professions functions in tight association with gender: when men take over, prestige rises, as 'women's work' is well... I just said it. Midwifery was ignored by men until they made themselves into gynecologists; the learned school master gave way to the boring old schoolmarm. Heck, the female computer (the person) evolved into the female programmer, only to get pushed aside by men when it became clear how much value and prestige such jobs would carry. Now, apparently, a prestige-flip is happening again in tech, [this time to front-end web designers](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/mar/14/tech-women-code-workshops-developer-jobs): so many women are entering the field that it is beginning to be seen as stereotypically female—and thus less prestigious (and less remunerative).

If that insult to injury is not enough of a whopper, consider that this entire discussion of tech diversity is taking place within a broader discussion of  about how the next wave in the tech revolution is going to put almost all of us—men and women alike—out of work. Computers are going to either do (or control robots that do) nearly all available work, leaving human labor superfluous. That is not to say that humans will not be making, creating, and contributing to society—the only question is whether (or how?) we're going to have a society that distributes the basic necessities (or distributes the equivalent ability to purchase them) produced by the robot-fed economy in order that we do not simply all starve to death once we stop being able to 'earn' our living.

In his book [_No More Work_](https://www.amazon.com/No-More-Work-Full-Employment/dp/1469630656\), James Livingston explores why our society is incapable of taking the plunge into a total revision of the relationship between income and work, given that: a) it is obvious the current market-based system is broken (by which he means there is no meaningful correlation to the value of one's labor and its renumeration); b) "social" labor, namely, the things we do simply because we want to (disseminate information/creative products, help others) goes on anyway, in spite of the fact that most of us don't earn any money from it; and c) financially, it would be entirely possible to institute a BIG (basic income guarantee).

Instead of say, blaming the fact that our government is controlled by corporations, oligarchs, and their well-compensated stooges, Livingston gives, at the very end of things, two reasons why 'we, as a country' aren't willing to go there. The first one rang true to me: white racism. "Americans can't imagine being their brother's keeper because they think getting something for nothing is the prerogative of people of color" (94). Over and over, from Reagan's welfare queens to Trump's American carnage, this perceived connection between race and undeserved transfer payments has been used successfully to prompt all sorts of Americans to vote against their own economic self-interest.

But the other reason we can't just say fuck work?

> For women, entry into the labor force, and, in a larger sense, the discovery of meaningful work outside the home, has been the key to the kingdom of equality with men.... Modern feminism was founded on... the notion that through work, women could enter the world as bearers of extra-familial identities, as abstract individuals rather than mothers, daughters, sisters, or wives.

When I heard that paragraph (I had purchased the audio book for a road trip), I was in such disbelief I started pounding the steering wheel. Women don't want to give up work because they are enjoying too much being treated as male equals? Say what?

James, allow me to summarize the history of women in the labor force for you:
* In the beginning. Excluded, save for women who 'had to' work (i.e., the poor). Paid much less.
* A bit later. Admitted into 'appropriate jobs'. And paid less.
* Later still. Admitted, reluctantly, into 'the old boy's club', and hazed and harassed for the privilege—oh, and still paid less.
* Maybe the mid-1980s? Expected to work—families were beginning to need double incomes. (But paid less, and rarely the boss.)
* Recently-ish. Of course women have careers! They start companies! A teeny tiny number of them are even CEOs of big corps! Woo hoo! Oh, but did I mention, that they are still paid less than men? ([$0.82 on a man's dollar, as of 2015](http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/07/01/racial-gender-wage-gaps-persist-in-u-s-despite-some-progress/.)

James, do you really think this history ends with women saying: "I'm having so much fun enjoying my equal opportunities and equal pay, I couldn't possibly say fuck work."

Let me help you out here, James: fuck work!

### Trumped and Tickled 
The other night I watched a truly fascinating documentary (on HBO) called _Tickled_. It is about tickling, but (spoiler alert! spoiler alert!) it becomes an exploration of the amazing amount/extent of harm one damaged person can do if he has the wealth to hire hands to do the dirty work—and the command of the Internet as a stage on which to do it. I found myself wondering if Mr. Tickle would have turned into such a total, utter schmuck had he had to work for a living. Maybe he'd have had some incentive to get help, or experienced some pressure to act right.

Instead, with all the protection that limitless (for his intents and purposes, anyway) money provides, he set up a world-wide trolling network for teenage boys to satisfy his tickling video fetish and, it seems pretty clear, to fulfill his equally intense need to deceive, manipulate, threaten, and blackmail these same young men. [Editor's note: After writing this, I came across the news of [Mr. Tickle's reported death](http://www.slashfilm.com/david-damato-dead/).

Yes, this man was clearly perverted, but the _system_ that connected this man to these young men is itself perverse: money (too much on one side, no prospect of enough on the other) was the grease on the wheels of the entire project. Maybe, I thought, if these boys lived in a society where they _could_ be contributors, in which they could understand themselves as producers rather than being raised to walk a bridge to nowhere (school, dead-end jobs), maybe they wouldn't be able to be seduced by the spoils of one asshole's unearned wealth and, in so doing, ruining the only thing they still had to take pride in: their public reputation.

Trump is a troll, too. He was a troll before the Internet but, like all men with insatiable appetites, he learned to adapt a new tool to his old needs. Just like with Mr. Tickle, his wealth has shielded him from any and all prods and incentives to become a better human being. Instead of trolling teenagers, Mr. Trump trolled the American electorate, offering them what they wanted and what he had a limitless supply of: rage-filled platitudes and reality-untroubled solutions. Just like Mr. Tickle, it worked for him. To the disbelief of many if not most, it worked all the way to the White House.

The only thing that stops people like Mr. Tickle—and like Mr. Trump—is confrontation. And what makes people reluctant to confront others is not, I don't think, a lack of courage: it is the social (and often legal) risks it carries. The documentary makers of _Tickled_ took tremendous risks to expose Mr. Tickle, risks that cannot be explained (I think, anyway) by the notion that they were motivated by a desire to make money off of a hit documentary.

We are living in age where social risks are heightened by the fact that someone can spread damning lies about you at the speed of light. (And women are disproportionately the victims of Internet trolling.) There now exists a generation of younger people who do not understand what privacy is: they don't seek it, they don't feel it is necessary—and they also are pretty naive about what it costs them to surrender it to corporations who make a buck off of it. We lovingly feed the monster that, at any moment, could turn on any one of us and crush us like a bug on the sidewalk. And we will keep feeding it under the naive assumption that we won't be its next victim.

### Fooled by school
We'll never be able to measure how many people voted for Trump (or against Clinton) based on fake news. And while it is true that the once-enviable American public school system has, on the whole, gone to shit in the last 25 years, the solution cannot be more education, as it is education that has gotten us here in the first place. Gatto observes:

> To learn to read and to like it takes about thirty contact hours under the right circumstances.... It's an fairly easy skill for anyone to pick up if good reasons to do so are provided. Exhortation isn't sufficient, however, nor intimidation, humiliation, or the confusion of a classroom full of strangers. The only way you can stop a child from learning to read and liking it—in a densely verbal culture which surrounds us all with printed language anywhere we turn—is to teach it the way we teach it. (152)

The skill of reading, combined with the freedom of even very young people (well, again, boys...) to grow up and live in the same world (including the labor market) as adults was enough to create the wealthiest society on Earth. The formal education system, in Gatto's view, came about only once corporations had monopolized the potential of a truly free (i.e., competitive) market and thus needed to transform the populace into consumers rather than competitors so that they could continue to make money while avoiding the main threat to their continued dominance: over-production. School, in short, was how the corporate interests protected themselves from any more up-and-comers who could knock them off their pedestals.

I'd say it has worked pretty well; a quick perusal of any online comments on any media site will be enough to tell you that most people who comment a) know they (and they alone) are right; b) feel the need to personally attack those who disagree with them; and c) feel no shame about expressing either of the first two in the crudest type of writing (i.e., short, unreflected-upon and unedited for style or grammar). The problem isn't, ultimately, that people _can_ not read, it's that they feel there is no reason to do so; after all, if you already are convinced that your world view is correct, then there is no motivation for you to spend large amounts of your time exposing yourself to material that would, were you not so convinced, potentially change your mind. The motives for learning must be personal, and a world where the best you can hope for is a job that puts you at the poverty line in exchange for 40 hours a week of your time _simply does not provide that motivation._

In short, the reason people aren't behaving like the world is their oyster _is because it isn't_.

### Colored Computers
There is this truly eerie moment at the end of the film _Hidden Figures_, about several African-American women who worked as mathematicians at NASA in the 1950s—in Jim Crow Virginia. (Now that I live in that state, it was a tad shocking to see represented what surely must have been the 'way it was' in the very town in which I live.) The film is a slice of three histories: the first, that of the beginning-of-the-end of Jim Crow; the second, the transition from human computers to machine computers; the third, the history of women in the embryonic stages of computer programming. One of three women whose story the film tells, Dorothy Vaughan, sees the writing on the wall (or, really, the huge machine in the room) regarding the future of her own (and fellow computers') employment, and so takes it on herself to learn how to work the machine that will replace her—so that she and her 'girls' can still have jobs.

At the movie's end, the colored computing unit is disbanded. While the movie has suggested that NASA is beginning to desegregate, it is clear that the essential driver of this change is economics: machines will now do the calculating. As Dorothy turns out the lights for the last time, the camera lingers for a long time on a plain sign on the wall that says simply "Colored Computers". This sign is, in the context of that era, one of many hateful reminders of Jim Crow and the principle it was based on: that citizens could (and should) be labeled inferior based on the color of their skin. In the context of the film, the director uses it as a challenge to confront your discomfort (and even disbelief/denial) that we—for history is not made of 'them'—used to make/believe these signs.

Personally, I found myself reflecting on the connections the sign suggests about the two societal changes its very strangeness intimates: this sign is meaningless today because there is both no more Jim Crow and no more 'human' computers. What does this both/and mean, I wonder, about the relationship between the social and technological changes that have occurred in the last 50-70 years? What does it mean to struggle to be granted full social dignity in the context of innovations that are constantly redefining what tasks and purposes will be the indicators of deservingness of that dignity?

I do not have an answer. What I do know is that the thread that runs through it all goes by the word that is not on that troubling sign: women. The film may be 'about' racial discrimination, but it was the film's portrayal of endemic and unquestioned sexism (including its intersection with race) that shocked me more—not because there is some scale of outrageousness on which we must rank these things, but because of all the other histories the film tells, that of women in the workplace did not have a clear trajectory. There are no more 'colored' workers, and no more 'human' computers, but when it comes to women at work, [we still have a long road ahead](http://www.npr.org/2017/03/20/520743555/former-law-student-gorsuch-told-class-women-manipulate-maternal-leave).
