---
date: 2019-11-06 17:50:00
title: It'll be OK, Boomer!
layout: post
---

> Many Trump voters take it as a matter of course that for the rest of their lives things are going to get worse for them—economically, spiritually, politically and culturally. They are not the only voters who think this way. Many young voters in their OK Boomer T-shirts feel exactly the same, except about climate change, employment prospects and debt.
#### —[Impeach Trump. Then Move On.](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/31/opinion/trump-impeachment.html) 

I was ready to serve from a position of cynicism. But then came the voters.

The polls open at 6am here, and the morning started off exactly as we'd expected: slowly. The sun rose, the temperature climbed at bit, and the trickle turned into a small stream. By 10am, we'd set up an additional table with pop-up "booths" to allow up to a dozen people to mark their ballots simultaneously. Our day of anticipated clock-watching boredom was turning into a busy one.

What was happening? This was a so-called "off-off" year election, namely, a non-Presidential and non-gubernatorial election year. In fact, there were no major party face-offs on the ballot at all in our blue bubble of a city; the candidate for (House Assembly) Delegate was running entirely unopposed, as was the incumbent Clerk of Court, and the incumbent state Senator was challenged only by an independent. School Board had five people running for four offices; the Soil and Water Conservation Director had two positions and only one listed candidate!

The only contest worthy of the name was the fact that there were six candidates for the three open seats on city council; although our current Mayor had been elected to council two years ago as an independent, most of the time, the November election typically just confirmed the result of the Democratic primary election held earlier in the same year. (And despite the fact that none of these Dem candidates were incumbents, this norm held yesterday as well.)

So what was happening? Why was this expected non-event of an election drawing so much interest, in particular from the very folks who generally do not vote in these non-national elections, that is, students at the University of Virginia? I could be wrong, but I don't think it was the city council race that was bringing them to the polls. I think it was something less specific but more important: a realization that they are going to inherit this earth, this nation. Older people tend to vote much more consistently and reliably; and as long as our experimental republic holds, the only thing that stops a Boomer with a vote is a Millennial and a Gen Z-er with two votes (that's one each). (And yes, the earliest Gen Z-ers can now vote.)

As I head deeper into my 40s, I'm starting to feel what I would call the "resonance" of my past. That is, I'm starting to get the sensation, which surely will only deepen, that I've lived a rather long time. (Of course, relative to my nearly 100-year-old grandmother, I've been here a whole minute.) What I mean by resonance is that I'm more likely than ever to connect events in my present life to past experiences. And this new form of connection is occurring spontaneously, even (often) unbidden. It is as if the previous decades of my conscious life have been digested and cataloged by a part of my brain that is now ready to serve them up whenever it feels it should. The fact that my memory in general has gotten much worse over this same period of time makes this phenomenon all the more fascinating. I catch myself wondering if this kind of sensation is what, maybe someday, turns into genuine wisdom.

Generational theorists Neil Howe and William Strauss apparently wanted to call the generation of Americans born between 1965 and 1979 "Thirteeners", for the 13th generation born since the American Revolution. That name never caught on; instead we call them Gen X, which then bequeathed the equally unrevealing names Gen Y and Gen Z. It seems sort of fitting, but also a bit sad, that instead of a moniker connecting me to the founding of this republic, my generation gets a no-name name. Perhaps X does mark the spot we find ourselves in: too old to be digital natives and too young to escape the looming climate crisis by conveniently dying before it gets bad. (Alert: if you are under 50 now, odds are that you'll be alive when 17% of Bangladesh's land goes underwater, displacing 18 million people, currently predicted for the year 2050.)

Yes, things are going to get worse. But it is naive to think that younger generations are going to respond to these crises with the same apathy, pessimism, or resignation of their elders. Those who observe cultural change seem to consistently underestimate what it is like not to have a long memory, not to have reached a stage where lived experiences accumulate and compound to the point where resonance and wisdom are, while never guaranteed, at least possible. It is so natural to distrust the young for what they do not know, but perhaps it is even a better attitude to appreciate them for it. Wisdom is great, but maybe forgetting has its own usefulness. I don't remember Nixon's presidency, these young voters don't remember Reagan's... what a thought to think that I could still be a poll worker 18 years from now to see the young voters who have no memory of Trump's.

Meanwhile, let's try to keep this republic. For the Seventeeners.