---
date: 2020-05-01 11:30:00
title: May Day, May Day
layout: post
---

> Mr. Trump’s relentless ghettoizing confirms something else that has been obvious for a long time, long before he became president: The United States is not united, especially when the chips are down. The most resources-rich country in the world could not find the wherewithal to warn its people about what was coming, and it continues to bumble basic things like administering tests and acquiring enough ventilators. This is because Republicans have been vilifying the federal government, embedded with the ideal of a common good for a common American people, for the past 40 years.
#### —[Life in Trump’s Coronavirus Ghetto](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/01/opinion/coronavirus-trump-race.html) 

In many European countries, the first of May is celebrated as International Workers' Day. Sure, America has Labor Day, but May Day still maintains much more of the tinge of the ninetheenth-century struggles for rights, including the eight-hour work day. 

Such struggles occurred in America, of course, but the devastation of Europe of the Second World War triggered a fundamental labor-relations reset that included the establishment of a healthy social safety net. In America, on the contrary, labor unrest was suppressed during the war, and employers established non-salary "benefits" to get around the wage freeze. One of these benefits: health insurance.

If making insurance contingent on employment seemed unideal before, now it seems downright unconscionable. In the middle of a pandemic, it goes against public health interests to allow millions more people to become uninsured through zero fault of their own. After all, the government—which is to say, ourselves the tax payers—will pay in the end when individuals can't and corporations refuse. Italy's health care system was certainly stressed by the coronavirus, but at least no one in that country feared going bankrupt when they went to the hospital—or worse still, didn't go to the hospital out of fear they couldn't afford to pay for treatment.

In a new book, [American Poison](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/53103810-american-poison), Eduardo Porter argues that the main motivation behind America's reluctance to build a functional welfare state is racial animus. While there is no doubt whatsoever that political movements, both past and present, have leveraged prejudice and fears about racial/ethnic Others, the actions of corporations when it comes to hiring immigrant labor (legally and illegally) speak far lounder than any xenophobic rhetoric. Sure, racists kept unions segregated, but the long run has proven that the real story isn't racial segregation; the true protagonist is American business's addiction to a never-ending supply of cheap, pliant labor. Even in the bubble I once lived in, academia, the higher-ups easily pitted grad students and post-docs whose jobs were dependent on visa renewal against young professors who were "only" risking their employment by speaking out against unfair treatment. And in this case, it was the citizens who either resigned or were dismissed. 

Yet even when their employers don't love them, Americans love to work. Indeed, far more than Europeans,  Americans derive their sense of identify from what they do for a living. Despite rises in productivity, Americans on the whole seem to believe that it is normal to have a measely two or three weeks of paid leave a year—if, of course, they have paid leave at all! A myth seems to have been built around the "hard working family" in this country that, from an outsider's perspective, seems self-punishing. For some labor—say, coal miners—this myth rises to the extreme notion of labor-as-self-sacrifice. Instead of seeing themselves as expendable pawns in a corporate rape-the-earth-for-profit scheme, these workers believe that they are keeping the lights on. The notion of "common good" has been turned on its head: instead of _fighting against_ exploitation as workers did a century ago, these workers _consistently vote for_ politicians who repeat their self-sacrifice mantra: only the (job) Creator can save you. 

This perverse pride in work, regardless of human (or environmental) harm, isn't just any sort of pride. The sacrifice of hard work is utterly emeshed in an outdated notion of American masculinity, in which men provide for their families with "manly" work, like mining and manufacturing. This cultural demand that men earn and women care pushed women out of the labor market that WWII had drawn them into and back into the home. Fast-forward 70 years, those jobs are mostly gone; women, long back in the workforce, have become in many households the main earners simply because service and care-work jobs are too "feminine" for men to accept. The sacrificial ethos of a man working, at great cost to himself, in order to provide for his family, worked well enough when the available jobs played into the myth, but without those jobs, that ethos has turned on itself and is driving (white) men to deaths of despair. 

Given that "welfare" has now been smeared in this country for over a generation—consistently by the right but also by the _cough Bill Clinton cough_ left—as a con by the lazy put over on the bonafide, "productive" class, only a systemic shock was ever going to provoke significant change. Yes, it's true that over the last two presidential campaign cylces, priviledged Americas are realizing that the America they live in is but one of [two Americas](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/08/opinion/sunday/trump-economy.html). But the coronavirus has done in one month what Bernie and his supporters could not manage in eight years: it has rendered self-evident the truth that people are more than workers, and jobs are necessary but not sufficient for a prosperous society. 

Suddenly, the old smear is powerless: in the face of the novel coronavirus, no amount of boot-strap pulling (or, for that matter, automatic-rifle toting in state capitals) is going to re-employ the vast swath of the workforce that was, through zero fault of its own, literally un-employed. And while it is only "natural" that employers "obey" the market and shed labor when the revenue stops flowing, the fact that we remain people with the same needs as before demands that capitalism have something behind it—both for the needs that markets can never adequately meet and for the times (like now) when markets cannot meet even the basic needs of many.

American business leaders know as well as anyone that the system was already broken; now that this crisis has made us all believers, for better or worse, in government bailouts, no one should fall ever again for the excuse that America cannot afford to supply the social protections that are taken for granted across the political spectrum in Europe: a living wage, paid sick leave, paid maternity leave, affordable childcare, and non-employment-contingent health insurance. Indeed, maybe employers will finally rally alongside workers to create a better system that suits the needs of both.

America will return to business. But business as usual is over—for good.